
ABSTRACT 
Despite concerns raised about the disclosure of personal 
information on social network sites, research has demonstrated 
that users continue to disclose personal information. The present 
study employs surveys and interviews to examine the factors that 
influence university students to disclose personal information on 
Facebook. Moreover, we study the strategies students have 
developed to protect themselves against privacy threats. The 
results show that personal network size was positively associated 
with information revelation, no association was found between 
concern about unwanted audiences and information revelation and 
finally, students’ Internet privacy concerns and information 
revelation were negatively associated. The privacy protection 
strategies employed most often were the exclusion of personal 
information, the use of private email messages, and altering the 
default privacy settings. Based on our findings, we propose a 
model of information revelation and draw conclusions for theories 
of identity expression.  
Human Factors, Security. 
Keywords 
Social Network Sites , Facebook, Information Revelation, 
Internet Privacy, Privacy Protection Strategies. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Social network sites  have become increasingly popular, 
with an estimated 80 to 90 per cent of undergraduate students 
actively participating in such services as MySpace, Friendster and 
Facebook . What attracts students to 
SNSs is their ability to converse with friends, share digital 
cultural artifacts and ideas, and connect to vast networks of 
people . Despite these potential benefits, 
scholars, privacy advocates and the media have raised concerns 
about the risks associated with the disclosure of personal 
information on SNSs .  
Much of the debate has focused on information revelation, that is, 
the amount and type of information users disclose . Consistently, research 
has found that users disclose accurate personal information on 
their profiles, seemingly without much concern. Gross and 
Acquisti  argue that in disclosing personal information on 
SNSs users effectively place themselves at a greater risk for cyber 
and physical stalking, identity theft and surveillance. However, 
the reasons why users willingly disclose information on their 
profiles have not been sufficiently investigated. An important 
study aimed at addressing this research question found that three 
important factors influence information revelation: future 
audiences, general privacy concerns, and gender . 
To further investigate privacy in SNSs, we continue Tufekci’s 
line of inquiry and investigate additional factors that could 
influence information revelation.  
Our study also expands on the current literature by examining 
students’ privacy protection strategies on Facebook. While 
several studies have demonstrated self-disclosure practices in 
university students and the threats associated with information 
revelation, little is known about the strategies students employ to 
protect themselves from privacy threats. We argue that these 
strategies could serve as moderating factors alleviating some of 
the problems that might emerge from information revelation. This 
portrays students as active participants in the construction of their 
identity, and not only as naïve users.  
2. UNIVERSITY STUDENTS’ 
INFORMATION REVELATION ON 
FACEBOOK 
University students are heavy users of Facebook. Indeed, Lampe 
et al.  found that 70 per cent of students report spending 
thirty minutes or less on Facebook per day and 21 per cent 
indicate spending more than an hour a day on average using the 
site. Research has also shown that students tend to disclose 
personal information on their profiles . For example, Gross and 
Acquisti  found that 82 per cent of active Facebook users 
disclosed personal information such as their birth date, cell phone 
number, personal address, political and sexual orientation, and 
partner’s name. Tufekci  has suggested that many students 
see a certain degree of information revelation as necessary to 
make SNSs useful: ‘why have a profile if your profile doesn’t say 
enough about who you are?’ . Based on this previous research, we expect that students’ 
   
frequency of Facebook use will correlate with their disclosure of 
personal information on Facebook. That is, the more often students 
log into their Facebook accounts, the more information they would 
be likely to reveal. For this reason, we propose the following 
hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 1: Frequency of Facebook use will be positively 
associated with information revelation on Facebook. 
Jenny Sundén  argues that in order for individuals to exist 
online they must first write themselves into being. In SNSs, such as 
Facebook, the process of writing oneself into existence occurs 
through the construction of a profile, which reveals personal 
information about the user. Lampe et al.  suggest that the 
inclusion of profile elements, such as a self-description, a statement 
of relationship status, a description of one’s interests, and a 
photograph of oneself, enables users to signal aspects of their 
identity, which assist other users in making decisions about 
declaring friendship links. They also argue that the ability to search 
SNS profiles reduces the amount of time spent locating former high 
school friends, current classmates, or people located in the same 
university or college dormitory. Furthermore, research has shown 
that users with larger social networks are often more forthcoming 
and open with their personal information on these sites. For 
example, Jones and Soltren  revealed that users with more 
than three hundred friends disclosed more information concerning 
their interests , favorite 
music , and clubs  than users with comparably smaller 
social networks. Hence, it should be expected that the more profile 
elements included on a user’s profile, the easier and more accurate a 
search will be, and the more likely that friendship connections will 
occur. For this reason, we explore the relationship between network 
size and information revelation on Facebook. This leads to the 
following hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 2: Facebook personal network size will be positively 
associated with information revelation on Facebook. 
Research has demonstrated that general concern for Internet privacy 
has an effect on the information revelation behaviors of Internet 
users . A 2000 Pew Internet survey 
reports that out of 45 per cent of individuals who have not provided 
real personal information to access a Web site, 61 per cent identify 
themselves as ‘hard-core privacy defenders.’ These individuals 
refuse to provide personal information to use an Internet site 
because they believe that Internet tracking is harmful, that their 
online activities are not private, and that there is a need to be 
concerned about businesses obtaining their personal information. 
Research has also suggested that individuals with a comparably low 
level of concern for Internet privacy tend to be much more 
forthcoming and open with the disclosure of their personal 
information online. Viseu et al.  found that online users who 
believe that privacy is only a concern once it has been lost or 
breached were inclined to perceive the benefits of disclosing 
personal information in order to use an Internet site as greater than 
the potential privacy risks. Furthermore, Joinson et al. , in 
their study examining privacy, trust and self-disclosure online found 
that trust and perceived privacy had a strong affect on individuals’ 
willingness to disclose personal information to a web site. They also 
indicate that individuals’ trust in the privacy threat – that is, the 
likelihood that a privacy breach will occur – influences their 
information revelation decisions. In other words, if the individual 
does not think their information will be used for potentially harmful 
purposes, they are more likely to disclose personal information 
online. Based on these prior findings, we propose the following 
hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 3: Concern for Internet privacy will be negatively 
associated with information revelation on Facebook. 
The literature on privacy online has suggested that Internet users are 
generally concerned about unwanted audiences obtaining personal 
information. Fox et al. , report that 86 per cent of Internet 
users are concerned that unwanted audiences will obtain information 
about them or their families, 70 per cent are concerned that hackers 
will access their credit card information, and 60 per cent are 
concerned that someone will find out personal information from 
their online activities. Acquisti and Gross  found similar 
results, showing that students expressed high levels of concern for 
general privacy issues on Facebook, such as a stranger finding out 
where they live and the location and schedule of their classes, and a 
stranger learning their sexual orientation, name of their current 
partner, and their political affiliations.  
Despite these concerns, research has also shown that users continue 
to disclose personal information and often disclose accurate 
personal information online . In their examination of information sharing and 
privacy on Facebook, Acquisti and Gross  revealed that 89 
per cent of students used their full name on their profiles, 87.7 per 
cent had disclosed their birth date and 50.8 per cent had listed their 
current address. Tufekci  found that concern about unwanted 
audiences had an impact on whether or not students revealed their 
real name in MySpace and whether or not students revealed their 
religious affiliation on MySpace and Facebook. Therefore, there 
may be an association between an individual’s concern about 
unwanted audiences accessing his or her profile and the amount and 
types of information he or she chooses to reveal on Facebook. 
Therefore, we predict that: 
Hypothesis 4: Concern for unwanted audiences will be 
negatively associated with information revelation on Facebook. 
Another way to examine students’ information revelation on 
Facebook is by looking at the concept of profile visibility. Profile 
visibility refers to the extent to which users’ profiles are accessible 
by other Facebook users. Typically, SNSs allow users to alter the 
visibility of their profiles in order to restrict unwanted or unknown 
others from accessing their profile and viewing their personal 
information. On Facebook, users can set their profile to one of four 
visibility levels: ‘all networks and all friends’, ‘some networks and 
all friends’, ‘friends-of-friends’, and ‘only friends’. While no 
research has examined the relationship between profile visibility and 
information revelation, it seems likely that the more visible the 
user’s profile, the less information he or she will reveal on 
Facebook. That is, we expect that users with restricted profiles 
would be more inclined to reveal personal information on Facebook 
than users with open profiles, as their information would be 
protected against possible invasions. For this reason, we propose the 
following hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 5: Profile visibility will be negatively associated 
with information revelation on Facebook. 
266
 
Users actively construct their identity on SNSs through the 
disclosure of personal information . However, 
research suggests that students are not completely naïve in their 
disclosure practices. boyd  found that teens frequently 
falsify personally identifiable information, such as their name, 
location, and age, in order to protect themselves against privacy 
concerns on MySpace. Similarly, in her examination of MySpace 
and Facebook, Tufekci  found that students’ concern for 
unwanted audiences accessing their profiles influenced them to 
use protective measures, such as altering the visibility of their 
profiles to ‘only friends’ on Facebook and using nicknames or 
monikors in place of real names on MySpace. In terms of the 
privacy protection strategies employed by students, previous 
research on privacy in SNSs has found conflicting evidence as to 
whether or not users employ tactics to protect themselves against 
privacy threats on SNSs. In two separate studies conducted at 
Carnegie Mellon University , for instance, Govani and 
Pashley  and Gross and Acquisti  found that despite 
awareness and concern for Internet privacy, users seldom provide 
false information and very rarely alter their privacy settings. 
While much of the debate in the literature has focused on the 
threats, the strategies have been largely ignored. To fill this gap, 
the present study investigates the following exploratory research 
question:  
What strategies do undergraduate students employ to protect 
themselves against privacy threats on Facebook? 
4. METHODS 

Ethics approval was obtained prior to commencing the study. 
Participation was voluntary. Participants for the survey were 
recruited from two communication studies courses. Eighty-five 
students completed a paper-and-pencil questionnaire. Eight 
students identified themselves as non-Facebook users and were 
removed from the final sample. Participants for the interviews 
were recruited through posters, which were displayed on bulletin 
boards across campus. Nineteen respondents participated in a 
face-to-face interview and two respondents opted for an email-
based interview. All interviews conducted face-to-face were 
recorded and transcribed with participants’ consent. During the 
interviews a profile analysis was conducted, which consisted of 
asking students to log on to Facebook and discuss the information 
they have revealed, the privacy settings they have in place and the 
protective strategies they employ. This provided rich accounts 
from the respondents to expand and elaborate on the information 
already obtained from surveys and interviews. The profile 
analysis also showed that students are often unaware or have 
forgotten what information they have disclosed and what privacy 
settings they have activated. By discussing the profiles in the 
presence of students, rather than downloading profiles or only 
relying on questionnaires , we gain a better understanding of information 
revelation and privacy practices. Moreover, it allowed us to 
discuss what information is accurate, why certain types of 
information were posted and not others, and the social meaning of 
the information included on the profile. Data collection took place 
between October 2007 and February 2008. 
4.3 Measures 
4.3.1 Information Revelation 
To investigate respondents’ information revelation, a scale 
adopted from Govani and Pashley  was used. Additional 
items were added to include a larger set of information types and 
to assess the extent to which respondents reveal information on 
Facebook . Respondents were asked to report which 
of several salient elements  they included on their 
Facebook profile. Based on the items, an additive scale was 
created that ranged from 1–17 and measured the number of ‘yes’ 
responses to the seventeen types of information that could be 
revealed. These items offer insight into the degree to which 
respondents reveal personal information on Facebook.  
4.3.2 Frequency of Facebook Use 
The frequency of Facebook usage was measured asking 
respondents to report how often they visit Facebook. Respondents 
reported their frequency of use on an eight-point scale . 
4.3.3 Personal Network Size 
Respondents were asked to report their total number of Facebook 
friends: ‘Approximately, how many Facebook friends do you 
have?’ This was used as a measure of personal network size on 
Facebook.  
4.3.4 Concern for Internet Privacy 
This measure was adopted from Tufekci  and was used to 
assess the extent to which respondents are concerned about 
general Internet privacy: ‘How concerned are you, if at all, about 
Internet privacy?’ Respondents were asked to indicate their level 
of concern: 1=‘not concerned at all’; 2=‘not too concerned’; 
3=‘somewhat concerned’; 4=‘very concerned’. 
4.3.5 Concern about Unwanted Audiences 
Based on Tufekci’s  analysis of future audiences, seven 
items were employed to measure respondents’ concern about 
profile access by unwanted audiences . The 
267
items were measured on a five-point Likert scale . Based on the items, an additive 
scale was created that measured respondents’ concern about 
unwanted audiences accessing their profile. These items formed a 
reliable scale with Cronbach’s alpha 0.84 . 
The scale measured the degree to which respondents believe that 
unwanted audiences might access their profiles .  
4.3.6 Profile Visibility 
Profile visibility was measured using a scale adopted from the 
‘Pew social networking websites and teens survey’ , which 
assessed the extent to which respondents’ profiles are accessible 
by other Facebook users. The profile visibility levels were coded 
as 1=‘visible to only my friends’; 2=‘visible to some of my 
networks and all of my friends’; 3=‘visible to all of my networks 
and all of my friends’; 4=‘visible to anyone searching Facebook’. 
Table 1 provides the means and standard deviations for key 
measures employed in this study. 
Table 1. Means and standard deviations of key measures 
 
M 

Information Revelation 

Frequency of Facebook Use 

Personal Network Size 

Concern for Internet Privacy 

Concern about Unwanted Audiences 

Profile Visibility 

 Privacy Protection Strategies 
To investigate respondents’ tactics for negotiating privacy on 
Facebook, a series of attitudinal questions were formulated. The 
items included in this measure were designed to tap the extent to 
which respondents use self-censorship tactics  and other privacy protection strategies 
 to protect themselves against privacy threats while 
using Facebook. The answers to these questions were reported on 
a 5-point Likert scale . See 
Table 3 for item wording, means and standard deviations. 
4.4 Data Analysis  
We ran a hierarchical regression analysis to examine the influence 
of Facebook usage, personal network size, concern for Internet 
privacy, concern about unwanted audiences and profile visibility 
in predicting information revelation. To analyze the qualitative 
data, we used the framework-based approach proposed by Ritchie 
et al. , which consists of classifying and organizing the data 
into a thematic framework based on key themes, concepts and 
categories. The main themes were then subdivided into a 
succession of related subtopics and the data from each respondent 
were synthesized and placed under the appropriate subtopic of the 
thematic framework.  
5. RESULTS 
5.1 Information Revelation 
In line with previous research , the data show high levels of 
information revelation on Facebook. An overwhelming 99.35 per 
cent reported using their actual name in their profile . Nearly two-thirds of respondents indicated their sexual 
orientation, relationship status, and interests . Large percentages of respondents 
noted their school name , e-mail address , birth date , the current city or town in which 
they live , and almost all respondents reported 
posting an image of themselves  and photos of their 
friends . By contrast, few respondents reported 
disclosing their physical address , their cell phone 
number  or their IM screen name , 
thereby limiting the likelihood of individuals contacting or 
locating them outside of Facebook. 
Figure 1 shows the information indicated on respondents’ profiles 
by gender. For the most part, the data show that there was very 
little difference in terms of the types of information that female 
and male respondents include on their profiles. For instance, 
female and male students were as likely to disclose their school 
name , email address 
, relationship status  and birth date . The only items that showed differences 
were current address, χ2 = 5.47, p <.05, and political 
views, χ2 =13.29, p >.05, with females indicating these 
types of information less than males.  
Figure 1. Information on profile by gender 
Sixty-four per cent of respondents had adjusted the visibility of 
their profile to ‘only friends’, thereby restricting profile access 
from unwanted or unknown individuals, while only 7.9 per cent 
had opted to leave their profile open to ‘anyone’ searching the 
Facebook network. The data also reveal that nearly a quarter of 
respondents chose to either leave their profiles open to ‘all 
networks and all friends’  or ‘some networks and 

The items on unwanted audiences show that users have a concern 
about unwanted audiences. Unwanted audiences refer to those 
individuals not directly linked to the SNS user who may gain 
access to a user’s profile without his or her knowledge or consent. 
The concern is highest for the following groups gaining access to 
private data: political parties, sexual predators, employers and 
university administrators. 
Table 2: Concern about unwanted audiences items 
Individual Items 
M 
S.D. 
Future employers will use the personal 
information contained on my Facebook site 
to assess my suitability with their company 
3.15 
1.31 
University admissions officers have started 
using the personal information on Facebook 
sites to assess applicant suitability prior to 
offering admissions 
2.52 
1.19 
Police officers are using Facebook to track 
underage drinking and other illegal 
activities 
2.98 
1.40 
Universities are monitoring Facebook 
postings, personal information and images 
to identify university code violators  
3.05 
1.31 
Employers are using Facebook to monitor 
the extra-curricular activities of their 
employees 

use social network sites 
such as Facebook to track, monitor and 
locate potential victims 

Political parties have begun using Facebook 
to target young professionals and students 
through the use of advertisements and data 
mining 

1=“strongly disagree”; 2=“disagree”; 3=“neither disagree nor 
agree”; 4=“agree”; and, 5=“strongly agree” 
 Information Revelation Model 
Model 1 shows no association between frequency of Facebook 
use and information revelation providing no support for 
Hypothesis 1. There was support for Hypothesis 2: personal 
network size was positively associated with information 
revelation. The larger students’ personal network on Facebook, 
the more likely they were to reveal information. In the second 
block, we tested hypotheses 3 and 4 by entering the two concern 
variables into the model. While general concern for Internet 
privacy was negatively associated with information revelation, 
concern for unwanted audiences showed no association with 
information revelation. In the last block, we tested hypothesis 5 
by entering profile visibility into the model. Profile visibility was 
positively associated with information revelation. The final model 
accounted for 40 per cent of the variance in information 
revelation. Table 2 provides the OLS regression predicting 
frequency of use and profile update. 1 
Table 3. OLS regression predicting frequency of use            
and profile update 
 
The interview data also provide insight into why students use 
Facebook and the benefits they derive from its use, which may 
further assist in understanding their information revelation 
behaviors on the site. The first theme identified was the desire to 
stay in touch with friends nearby and faraway. Diana, a 25-year-
old health science major, reports using Facebook to maintain 
contact with geographically distant friends. Facebook allows her 
to find out information about her friends’ activities without a 
significant time commitment. The second theme identified was to 
receive up-to-date information on social events. Several 
respondents noted that students are increasingly using Facebook 
to meet, and that it is often the only place to find out about events. 
Ashley, a first year medical student, reports using Facebook 
almost exclusively for this purpose, stating that Facebook 
membership is required to gain access to this type of information.  
The third theme identified by the interview respondents was 
photograph access and/or storage. Facebook allows users to create 
digital photo albums, providing an easy and convenient way to 
store and organize pictures from events, activities, locations, etc. 
Samantha, a second year music major, reports that her Facebook 
profile is comprised mainly of albums from camp and various 
childhood and adolescent events. Sharing digital content hence is 
a primary activity on Facebook for this user group. A fourth 
theme identified by respondents was the use of Facebook as a 
replacement for email and/or instant messaging. For example, 
Elizabeth, a 24-year-old medical student, reports that she uses 
Facebook instead of email to send quick messages to friends. 
Users find it convenient as they can access Facebook from 
anywhere and do not have to look up email addresses or phone 
numbers. Facebook in this regard functions as an address book 
that is kept and updated by its users.  
An additional theme that emerged in the interviews was whether 
or not the information had been previously mentioned in an 
offline context. For example, Charlie, a 23-year-old science 
student, noted, “What is important is not putting up things that I 
would under normal circumstances conceal, such as personal 
matters of finance, job status, where I live … stuff like that. I 
suppose the influence then is my own judgment and not external.” 
Similarly, Andrew, a 20-year-old music major, reported that his 
decision to either reveal or conceal personal information on 
Facebook was influenced by whether or not he had previously 
discussed the information with friends outside of Facebook. Only 
if the information had been revealed offline, did he subsequently 
reveal it on Facebook. Thus, the experiences of Charlie, Andrew 
and others suggest that information deemed too personal to reveal 
offline, is also too personal to reveal on Facebook and therefore is 
excluded from the students’ profile.  
In the interviews, respondents also mentioned three key types of 
concern that impacted their information revelation on Facebook. 
The first concern was that their information would be used for 
potentially harmful purposes by unknown others. The second concern mentioned by respondents was that 
their information would be used, sold or appropriated without 
their knowledge or consent.. Finally, the last concern reported by 
respondents was that known others—that is, individuals known to 
the user in an offline context—would see information and/or 
images posted on Facebook that was not intended for them to 
view.  


 Privacy Protection Strategies on Facebook 
Based on negative media accounts or their own negative 
experience with the site, users have developed strategies to 
protect their privacy. We found that students employ a wide range 
of strategies and that each strategy has unique characteristics. 
270
1) to 
send private email messages instead of posting messages to a 
friend’s wall, 2) to change the default privacy settings, and 3) to 
exclude personal information. Other important strategies include 
untagging oneself from images, deleting messages posted to one’s 
Facebook wall, and limiting access to one’s profile. Blocking 
users and providing fake or inaccurate information are less 
frequently employed strategies.  
Table 4. Privacy Protection Strategies 
Individual Items 

I have provided fake or inaccurate information 
on Facebook to restrict people I don’t know 
from gaining information about me 

I have excluded personal information on 
Facebook to restrict people I don’t know from 
gaining information about myself 

I have sent private email messages within 
Facebook instead of posting messages to a 
friend’s wall to restrict others from reading 
them message 

contacting me and accessing my Facebook 
profile 

Certain contacts on my Facebook site only 
have access to my limited profile 

I have changed my default privacy settings 

I have deleted messages posted to my 
Facebook 
wall 
to 
restrict 
others 
from 
viewing/reading the message 

I have untagged myself from images and/or 
videos posted by my contacts 

Scale: 1=“strongly disagree”; 2=“disagree”; 3=“neither disagree 
nor agree”; 4=agree; 5=“strongly agree”. 
Based on an analysis of the interview data, we discovered that 
strategies served different privacy objectives. These privacy 
objectives can be described in terms of Goldie’s categorization of 
privacy concerns. Goldie  describes expressive privacy 
concerns as the ability to control the extent to which an individual 
is known by chosen others. By contrast, an informational privacy 
concern is defined as the right to control access to one’s personal 
information . First, the 
respondent is aware of the expressive privacy risks associated 
with the disclosure of personal information and images on 
Facebook. Second, she has enacted measures to protect herself 
against subsequent negative feedback from her family. In other 
words, the respondent has opted to limit her self-expression in 
order to reduce the likelihood of family members accessing 
specific content. 
Use of the limited profile was another measure employed by 
respondents to protect their expressive privacy. The limited 
profile allows users to restrict certain groups from accessing 
various information types. Justine, a third year science student, 
for example, reported placing her sister and their mutual friends 
on a limited profile to restrict them from accessing information 
that could subsequently be used to inform her mother of her 
activities. In this way, the limited profile enables Justine and 
others to protect their expressive privacy without significantly 
limiting their self-expression and freedom to associate.  
Despite the mention of expressive privacy concerns, it was the 
informational privacy concerns that respondents faced when using 
Facebook that appeared the most pressing and the most in need of 
protection. An informational privacy concern, for example, is that 
unwanted audiences will access information and use it for 
potentially harmful purposes. Rebecca, a 22-year-old humanities 
student. Similar comments around 
concerns about unwanted audiences came from the majority of 
respondents, and most employed a combination of the strategies 
used by   
It is interesting to note that students do not use fake or inaccurate 
information as a protective measure. The primary reason 
expressed by our sample was that it seemed nonsensical to falsify 
information because their friends would question the validity of 
the information disclosed. A few respondents also noted that their 
disclosure of false information in the past had caused confusion, 
resulting in numerous messages being sent to inquire about the 
validity of the information. While the majority of respondents 
opted to include only valid information, a few respondents noted 
that their ‘about me’ section was in fact fictional. These 
respondents indicated that the informational was intended to be 
comical rather than intentionally deceitful. These results are 
consistent with previous research, which has found that SNS 
profiles tend to be either honest and truthful or playful and ironic, 
instead of intentionally deceitful . 
6. DISCUSSION 
In the present study, we address three issues of importance to the 
privacy and SNSs literature. First, we investigate the reasons why 
users reveal personal information on SNSs and propose a 
preliminary model. Second, we describe a novel method of data 
collection that includes profile analysis as a means to both 
corroborate data obtained from self-reports and elicit further 
descriptions from participants. Facebook is particularly well-
suited for this type of data collection as profiles are identical for 
all users allowing for easy comparison across participants. 
we propose that examining privacy protection strategies is 
essential as these represent an important component of 
information revelation. Examining information revelation in 
isolation does not provide a complete picture of users’ 
understanding of privacy. Privacy protection strategies show 
users’ reaction to privacy concerns and their active engagement 
with the information they choose to reveal on SNSs.  
The SNSs literature has extensively investigated the information 
revelation practices of students. We continue this line of research 
by investigating the reasons why students reveal information on 
these sites. Our preliminary model shows three factors associated 
with information revelation. We found that the larger students’ 
Facebook network size, the more information is revealed in their 
profiles. In accord with Lampe et al. , we find that profile 
elements act as signals, revealing aspects of a user’s personality. 
Through these signals users establish common ground and make 
decisions about declaring friendship connections. Information 
revelation seems to serve a social purpose increasing students’ 
opportunities for social interaction and participation, as well as 
for the maintenance and formation of relationships .  
Concern for Internet privacy was negatively associated with 
users’ information revelation practices. That is, students with a 
high level of concern for Internet privacy tended to disclose less 
personal information on Facebook. Contrary to previous findings, 
our results suggest that students not only ‘say they are concerned’ 
about privacy on the Internet, they also make a concerted effort to 
protect themselves against possible invasions by withholding 
personal information on their profiles. By contrast, we did not 
find an association between concern about unwanted audiences 
and information revelation on Facebook: students’ concern about 
unwanted audiences did not impact the amount of information 
that they chose to reveal on their profiles. This is surprising as we 
expected that general concern for Internet privacy and unwanted 
audiences would both predict the amount of information that an 
individual chooses to reveal. A possible explanation is that 
concern for unwanted audiences affects how people manage the 
visibility of their profiles, but not the information that they reveal 
on their profiles in general. Perhaps those individuals who show a 
greater concern for unwanted audiences will also attempt to 
manage their profile by making it less visible rather than 
revealing less information. This could be further tested in future 
research. The third factor associated with information revelation 
is profile visibility. The less an individual closed their profile to 
others, the more information they revealed. This suggests that 
individuals, who are generally concerned about their privacy and 
hence close their profile to only friends, will reveal less 
information than those who do not manage their profiles.  
The results of the present study also suggest that students employ 
a variety of protection strategies in order to address their privacy 
concerns. The strategies used most often by students to protect 
themselves were the exclusion personal information from their 
profiles, the use of private email messages to communicate, and 
alteration of the default privacy settings. We found that the 
strategies employed were linked to specific privacy concerns. 
Students in the interview sample who expressed concerns related 
to expressive privacy  tended to 
manage their concerns by either untagging or removing 
photographs or by making use of the limited profile to restrict 
certain contacts or groups of contacts from viewing specific types 
of personal information. Students who expressed concerns related 
to informational privacy  restricted 
access to their profile and withheld information that could be used 
to link them to a physical location. The data therefore suggest that 
each privacy protection strategy has unique characteristics and 
supports students’ privacy objectives in different ways.  
In our study, students do not perceive the use of fake or inaccurate 
information to be a useful protective measure. Interview data 
suggest that students consider the falsification of personal 
information to be impractical and confusing because their friends 
and peers would question the validity of the information 
disclosed. As other researchers have noted, the public display of 
one’s connections serves as verification on the reliability of 
identity claims ensuring that information on profiles is accurate 
and/or playful and ironic, rather than intentionally deceitful 
. In this way, the structure 
of Facebook—that is, the fact that one’s connections are linked to 
one’s profile—encourages students to reveal information that is 
truthful rather than deceiving.  
We conclude that examining privacy on Facebook requires the 
consideration of multiple factors. First, information revelation 
itself can consist of different types of elements. We identified 
both expressive and informational privacy as distinct dimensions 
that are managed differently by users . Second, differences in findings across studies are difficult 
to explain because they may be the result of changes happening to 
the audience in Facebook or to the features available on the site. 
As Tufekci  has suggested, by allowing the general public 
to use Facebook, students’ perceptions of the site as a secure and 
private community may have been altered, affecting their 
behavior and information revelation practices. In this way, many 
students may be more likely to withhold certain types of 
information from their profiles than they were before general 
audiences could join Facebook.  
The present study has a number of limitations. First, the findings 
are based on a small and non-representative sample. Second, the 
information revelation scale is based on a limited number of 
items. Third, the model needs to include further variables, for 
example control variables, such as age, gender, and area of study. 
Fourth, the results of the study can only be generalized to 
university students. Future research could seek to expand the 
present study by examining other user groups, such as high school 
or elementary school students, to see if their information 
revelation and privacy protection practices and behaviors on 
Facebook differ from those of university students.  
