
 /Internet Privacy Concerns
 Introduction
 Information privacy, defined as the ability of the individual to
 control when, how, and to what extent his or her personal
 information is communicated to others , is one
 of the most important ethical, legal, social, and political issue
 of the information age . The increase in digitalized personal information and
 advances in Internet technologies pose new challenges to
 consumers' information privacy . On one hand,
 personalized web services and business intelligence software
 require the collection and mining of unprecedented amounts
 of personally identifying information .
 On the other hand, as consumers become content providers on
 web blogs and social networking websites, their personal
 information becomes more vulnerable. Lawsuits against
 popular websites  for violation of online privacy, and the
 implementation of online privacy protection acts , are evidence of the increased
 importance and interest in online privacy. Researchers are
 also advocating a reexamination of privacy concerns to reflect
 the contemporary nature of this dynamic construct . Under these conditions,
 understanding individuals' privacy concerns is fundamental
 to the success of emerging Internet technologies.
 In this paper, we focus on Internet privacy concerns ,
 which is a special case of the more general information
 privacy concerns. The Internet is becoming one of the most
 popular media through which consumers' personal information is transmitted and collected by numerous companies. In
 particular, we are interested in studying IPC as a perception
 in a dyadic relationship between an individual and an online
 entity, which can either be a particular website or a category
 of websites, such as commercial websites. Similar definitions
 have been adopted in recent publications on IPC , in which IPC is defined
 as the degree to which an Internet user is concerned about
 website practices related to the collection and use of his or her
 personal information. According to this definition, IPC
 reflects an individual's perception of his or her concern for
 how personal information is handled by websites, which is
 different from his or her expectation of how websites should
 handle his or her personal information. For example, an
 individual may expect a website to provide adequate protection of his or her personal information, but it does not necessarily mean that this individual is genuinely concerned about
 providing his or her personal information to the website.
 Given the importance of information privacy concerns, and
 IPC in particular in the Internet age, there have been many
 attempts to conceptualize them. However, there is a lack of
 consistency in these conceptualizations. In past research,
 information privacy concerns and IPC have been conceptualized as a single first-order factor , multiple first-order
 factors , and a second-order construct . Even in studies where they are
 recognized as a second-order construct, there is little consensus on the underlying first-order factors or dimensions.
 In addition, there is little agreement on the definitions and
 operationalization of the first-order factors. For instance,
 dimensions that are measured similarly are named and defined
 differently across studies . The definitions of some dimensions
 include multiple subdimensions , while others are defined to be one thing but have items
 measuring other dimensions . Some studies
 propose an overall general dimension, but an examination of
 the items reveals multiple subdimensions .
 Further, there are significant differences in the measurement
 of information privacy concerns and IPC. In most studies,
 individuals were asked to report their levels of agreement with
 privacy related items . However, the items are phrased from
 different perspectives, not only across different instruments,
 but also within the same instrument. For example, in 's  instrument, the items measuring the collection
 dimension reflect perception of one's concern for others'
 behavior , while the items measuring the remaining dimensions reflect one's expectation of others' behavior. These
 measurement differences may impact the consolidation of
 findings from prior studies. As this impact has not been
 examined previously, it will be useful to determine if there is
 a need to adopt a more consistent wording or perspective in
 measuring the dimensions of IPC.
 Given the different conceptualizations and measurements of
 IPC, it is critical to resolve the inconsistency in the prior
 literature and consolidate understanding of IPC so as to provide a foundation for future development of this dynamic and
 complex construct. This paper has two research objectives:
  to develop an integrated conceptualization of IPC, and

 
 /Internet Privacy Concerns
  to validate the integrated conceptualization of IPC. We
 will use the multidimensional developmental theory  to identify alternative theoretical conceptualizations of IPC. We will review the prior literature to
 identify the key lower-order dimensions, determine the
 potential factor structures of the integrated conceptualization
 of IPC, and develop a consistent wording of items across
 dimensions. The validity of the integrated conceptualization
 of IPC will be examined through four large-scale empirical
 studies. The main contributions of this research are twopronged. First, we will contribute toward clarifying the
 conceptualization of IPC in terms of its factor structure, its
 underlying dimensions, and its operationalization. Second,
 we will provide empirical evidence for our proposed integrated conceptualization of IPC. In summary, this research
 will contribute to a better understanding of the conceptualization of IPC, and provide a reliable and valid instrument for
 research into IPC.
 Theoretical Background
 Multidimensional Developmental Theory
 The multidimensional developmental theory  is a
 framework to understand individuals' perceptions of privacy
 and privacy invasion . MDT argues
 that privacy concern is a multidimensional concept that can be
 described as a result of self-development, environmental
 impact, and, most importantly, interpersonal interaction. Selfdevelopment and environmental impact describe how individuals develop privacy concern over time, both as a result of
 a self-development process that focuses on autonomy and as
 a result of the impacts of cultural, social, and physical
 settings. According to Laufer and Wolfe , the
 interpersonal interaction aspect constitutes the core of privacy
 perception, as it assumes the existence of others and focuses
 on the relationship between an individual and others. This
 aspect of MDT is consistent with the dyadic relationship
 assumed in our definition of IPC, and therefore is most relevant to our research on IPC. In the context of IPC, interpersonal interaction can be viewed as an inter- web-personal
 interaction which is a dyadic relationship between an
 individual and an online entity, such as a website.
 In addition, MDT proposes that the interpersonal interaction
 aspect of privacy has two main components: interaction
 management and information management. The interaction
 management component describes how an individual manages
 his or her interaction with others, while the information
 management component describes how an individual manages
 his or her personal information. These two components of
 interpersonal interaction are central to IPC as defined in our
 paper, because they put privacy concern into a context and are
 congruent with individuals' privacy concern as experienced
 in online activities.
 In applying MDT to the study of IPC, we made a few
 observations. First, IPC focuses on an individual's privacy
 concern as a result of interaction with websites, and such
 interaction typically involves the collection and usage of his
 or her personal information. Hence, we define the interaction
 management component of IPC more specifically as the
 ability of an individual to manage the collection and subsequent use of his or her personal information by websites.
 Second, as early as in the 1970s, researchers began to
 recognize the potential threat to the privacy of personal data
 by computer technologies . In MDT, specifically noted that the presence of computerized
 personal data and how such data is managed is an important
 aspect of the information management component. Research
 has shown that online consumers are very concerned about
 the efforts of companies in protecting their personal data after
 it has been collected , and it is critical that
 companies take steps and formulate policies to protect the
 integrity and well-being of the data . Hence, when we examine the information management component of IPC, it is important to incorporate the
 individual's perception of how personal data is managed by
 websites.
 Third, MDT is ambiguous about the role of control and choice
 in understanding privacy concerns. On one hand, MDT
 argues that control and choice are two distinct elements
 related to privacy concerns, in addition to the self-development, environmental impact, and interpersonal aspects.
 Laufer and Wolfe  refer to them as the ability to perceive options  and to exercise choice among
 options  when it comes to the management of
 personal information. This view of awareness and control is
 shared by other researchers. For example, social contract
 theory , which has often been
 used to study privacy concerns, suggests that the fairness of
 collection of personal information on a website can only be
 justified if an online consumer is granted control and
 informed of the intended use of the information. Similarly, argue that consumers are
 vulnerable in their dealings with businesses due to a lack of
 information about and an inability to control the subsequent
 use of their personal information. Some researchers even
 define the conditions of privacy violation based on whether
 individuals are informed of or have control over how their
 personal information will be used . The Fair Information Practices act also
 identified the provision of sufficient notice and choice as two
 key aspects of privacy protection .
 On the other hand, MDT also relates control closely with the
 interpersonal interaction component of privacy, and describes
 it as an individual's loss of control over interactional boundaries  and loss of control
 over personal information. This conceptualization assumes
 that control is a part of interpersonal management. There is
 empirical support in prior research for such a conceptualization. For example, Sheehan and Hoy  found that
 "control over collection and usage of information" emerges as
 the strongest factor in explaining the variance of IPC.
 Similarly,  measured privacy
 concerns as the degree of control required by consumers over
 personal information acquisition and use. 
 argued that privacy can be viewed as control of information
 about the self, and such control requires that an individual
 manages the outflow of information as well as the subsequent
 disclosure of that information to third parties. Hence, an
 alternative view is that control is a natural part of interpersonal management efforts by the individual.
 Based on the above discussion, we propose four alternative
 theoretical frameworks for the IPC construct .
 In accordance with MDT, IPC is conceptualized as a multidimensional construct in all of the frameworks. Specifically,
 theoretical framework la recognizes the unique roles of
 control and awareness in addition to other aspects of privacy
 concerns, and proposes three main dimensions of IPC,
 including inter-web-personal dimension, control dimension,
 and awareness dimension. Theoretical framework lb reflects
 the alternative conceptualization of control, where it is considered to be part of the inter-web-personal dimension, and
 thus not included as a main dimension of IPC. In theoretical
 frameworks 2a and 2b, we decompose the inter- web- personal
 dimension into interaction management and information
 management, while preserving the other dimensions proposed
 in theoretical frameworks la and lb. Next, we proceed with
 a literature review to see how these main dimensions are
 captured and reflected in prior research.
 Literature Review
 We reviewed the prior literature from various disciplines to
 determine  the key dimensions of IPC identified in prior
 research and how they fit into the theoretical frameworks we
 proposed earlier;  the existing factor structures of IPC in
 prior research; and  how IPC is measured in the various
 instruments. Our goal is to consolidate findings from existing
 research into the theoretical frameworks based on MDT, and
 develop an integrated conceptualization of IPC. We included
 both studies on information privacy concerns and studies on
 IPC in particular, as information privacy concerns research
 conducted before the Internet age can also inform privacy
 research in the online environment. Table  summarizes the
 research from various disciplines.
 Key Dimensions of IPC
 We first identify the key dimensions of IPC in the extant
 literature and relate them to the theoretical frameworks developed earlier based on MDT. However, not all studies provide
 clear definitions of their dimensions, and in some studies, the
 items tap different dimensions . Even when clear descriptions of the dimensions are provided, the definitions and the
 nature of these dimensions often vary across studies . Hence, it was necessary to also examine the instruments to confirm the dimensions. We identified the key dimensions of IPC and related
 them to the proposed theoretical frameworks in two stages.
 In the first stage, four academics independently identified
 relevant dimensions and reviewed the instruments to confirm
 which dimensions they represent. After independent reviews,
 a group discussion was held to resolve any differences. Our
 investigation identified six key dimensions that are most
 commonly utilized in prior conceptualizations of IPC. They
 are collection, secondary usage, errors, improper access,
 control, and awareness. We adapted the definitions of these
 dimensions to the current research context. Specifically,
 collection is the degree to which a person is concerned about
 the amount of individual-specific data possessed by websites
 . Secondary usage is the degree to
 which a person is concerned that personal information is
 collected by websites for one purpose but is used for another,
 secondary purpose without authorization from the individual
 . Errors is the degree to which a person is
 concerned that protections against deliberate and accidental
 errors in personal data collected by websites are inadequate
 . Improper access is the degree to which
 a person is concerned that personal information held by websites is readily available to people not properly authorized to
 view or work with the data . Control is the
 degree to which a person is concerned that he/she does not
 have adequate control over his/her personal information held
 by websites . Finally, awareness is the
 2We included the original papers that proposed and used unique measurement
 of information privacy concerns or IPC. Papers that applied previously
 developed instruments  were excluded.
    

 In addition to the six key dimensions, there are other aspects
 of IPC proposed in several studies. One concern is the fear
 that one's browsing or clicking behavior is being monitored
 or tracked . As monitoring represents a form of data collection from Internet users,
 it can be captured by the collection dimension. It can also
 belong to the awareness dimension depending on whether
 users are informed of the practice or not. Other concerns
 include identity issues , which are not directly related to
 concerns about the privacy of one's own personal information; legal issues , which do not necessarily provide an indication of how one's personal information is actually handled by
 websites; application issues , which are
 services enabled by personal information collected; security
 issues, which are distinct from privacy issues ; and issues that may affect IPC but are not part of it
 . As these concerns are not
 directly related to IPC, we do not incorporate them into our
 conceptualization of IPC.
 In the second stage, the same four academics independently
 relate the six key dimensions to the theoretical frameworks
 proposed by MDT. A group discussion was held to resolve
 any differences. As Table  shows, the collection and secondary usage dimensions are core components of privacy
 concerns that are most commonly identified in prior research.
 In addition, they both reflect the interaction management
 dimension of IPC as they describe how an individual manages
 the collection and subsequent use of his/her personal information by websites. Further, an individual's concerns over the
 integrity and well-being of his/her personal information are
 reflected in the errors and improper access dimensions of IPC.
 Both of these dimensions describe common threats to
 personal information after it is collected by websites, if not
 managed properly. Next, control is a complex factor that is
 considered by some researchers as a distinct dimension of IPC
 , while other
 researchers considered it to be part of the interaction management dimension . Two interesting observations can be made here.
 First, the ambiguity with the control dimension coincides with
 the alternative conceptualizations of control in the theoretical
 frameworks based on MDT. Both conceptualizations of control have received some support from the literature. Thus, it
 is critical to examine both conceptualizations in our study of
 IPC. Second, virtually no prior study has considered control
 as part of the information management dimension, probably
 because our definition of the information management
 dimension focuses more on websites, and individuals may not
 perceive themselves as having control over how websites
 manage their data. Awareness is often identified as a unique
 factor of IPC, probably because regardless of the interaction

 information privacy concerns .
 There are many benefits to higher-order constructs. They can
 provide a higher level of abstraction than their underlying
 dimensions, making it easier to examine the relationship
 between the construct and its related antecedent and dependent constructs in a nomological network . Higher-order constructs are also more parsimonious
 due to the gain in the degrees of freedom . In addition, a higher-order construct allows an examination of the relative strengths of the
 lower-order constructs. Factor loadings can represent how
 reliably each of the lower-order constructs reflects the higherorder construct and how important each of them is . Finally, a higher-order factor structure provides the
 flexibility to encompass additional factors at lower levels
 when needed .
 On examining the main components of IPC identified through
 MDT and the key lower-order dimensions of IPC identified in
 the literature, IPC may even be a third-order construct. The
 reason IPC has been identified as a second-order factor in the
 prior literature may be because the lower-order dimensions
 included in prior studies belong to only one main component
 of IPC. For example, 's  instrument has
 four dimensions, which all fall into the inter-web-personal
 component. Similarly, 's  instrument has
 three dimensions, which all belong to the interaction management dimension.
 Our review of studies on higher-order factors, most of which
 are in the psychology and management literature , found that the identification of higher-order factors should be driven by a
 theoretical definition of the construct followed by a review of
 prior empirical and theoretical research to identify a plausible
 set of lower-order dimensions. A third-order factor structure
 may be necessary when more than one of the lower-order
 dimensions loads on a single facet of the theoretically defined
 construct. The presence of multiple dimensions of IPC and
 the assortment of second-order factor structures for IPC
 suggest the possibility of a higher-order construct. In the next
 section, we examine alternative models of IPC to see if a
 third-order factor structure is desirable.
 Alternative Models of IPC
 Based on the theoretical frameworks identified through MDT
 and our uncovering of the key dimensions in the existing
 privacy literature, we propose a number of alternative models
 of IPC . As a baseline, we will examine how
 well an integrated conceptualization of IPC encompassing the
 six key dimensions compares to two popular conceptualizations in the prior literature. Model  represents Stewart and
 Segars' s  second-order factor model with 's
  four first-order factors. Model  represents ' s  second-order factor model with three first-order
 factors. Model  hypothesizes a model with six correlated
 first-order factors . Such a model is typically included as a baseline
 model when testing for higher-order models . Finally, Model  imposes a second-order factor of IPC
 on the six first-order factors.
 Next, we propose eight alternative higher-order models based
 on the theoretical frameworks identified by MDT. Specifically, we propose a pair of models for each theoretical framework, with one model incorporating a third-order general
 factor of IPC and the other model being its lower-order alternative. A third-order factor imposes a structure on the pattern
 of correlations among its lower-order factors . In confirmatory factor analysis , when a
 higher-order factor is not included, the lower-order factors are
 typically allowed to freely correlate with each other. There
 3For example, the "meaning and satisfaction in life" construct has three
 theoretical components, including relationship satisfaction, purposeful living,
 and work and health satisfaction . In turn, each
 component has multiple lower-order factors. For example, the relationship
 satisfaction component has three subdimensions: peer relationships, intimate
 relationships, and family relationships.
 
 /Internet Privacy Concerns
 are a few criteria to help determine whether a higher-order
 factor is needed for a complex construct. First, a higher-order
 factor is more likely to exist if the correlations among the
 lower-order factors are relatively high . Second, a comparison of the goodness of fit statistics
 between the higher-order model and the lower-order alternative model will inform us whether the specification of the
 third-order general factor is reasonable . Third, in a nomological network, using lower-order
 factors , instead of using their higher-order general factor, as
 direct determinants of the dependent variable can result in
 high error variance and inaccurate path coefficient estimates
 of the structural model, due to multicollinearity among firstorder factors . Based on the
 above criteria, we can compare the validity of the proposed
 models.
 Models  and  are instantiations of theoretical framework la.
 Model  includes a second-order factor of inter-web-personal
 dimension, and two first-order factors of control and awareness. This model theorizes that there are unique roles for
 control and awareness in addition to the inter-web-personal
 dimension. Model  imposes a third-order general factor of
 IPC on Model  and theorizes that the lower-order dimensions
 are best represented by a general factor.
 Models  and  are instantiations of theoretical framework lb.
 Model  includes one second-order factor of inter-webpersonal dimension, and one first-order factor of awareness.
 It represents the alternative view of control as being part of
 the inter- web-personal dimension. Model  imposes a thirdorder general factor of IPC on Model  to reflect that the
 lower-order dimensions are best represented by a general
 factor.
 Models  and  are instantiations of theoretical framework
. This model
 differentiates between the interaction management and information management components of the inter-web-personal
 dimension, and recognizes the unique roles of control and
 awareness. Model  imposes a third-order general factor of
 IPC on Model  and theorizes that the lower-order dimensions
 are best represented by a general factor.
 Models   and  are instantiated from theoretical framework
 2b. Model   consists of the two second-order factors of
 interaction management and information management, and
 one first-order factor of awareness. This model differentiates
 between the interaction management and information management components of the inter-web-personal dimension,
 and represents the alternative view that control is a part of the
 inter web-personal dimension. Model  imposes a thirdorder general factor of IPC on Model   to reflect that the
 lower order dimensions are best represented by a general
 factor. Wording of Items: Perception Versus Expectation
 As part of our literature review, we also examined the
 wording of items in all of the instruments that were used to
 measure information privacy concerns and IPC. Some
 researchers have emphasized the importance of consistent
 wording in measuring multifaceted constructs . A close scrutiny of the items measuring information privacy concerns and IPC reveals that there is
 inconsistency in wording both across instruments and sometimes within the same instruments. The majority of items can
 be categorized as either perception or expectation measures.
 Further, perception measures can be classified into two
 perspectives, the perception of one's concern for others'
 behavior and the perception of others ' behavior , while the
 expectation measures typically describe one's expectation of
 others ' behavior. In the extant privacy literature, "others"
 refers to companies or websites that collect personal information. Items measuring the perception of one 's concern for
 others ' behavior typically start with "I am concerned. . .," "I
 mind. The fact that a website explains how
 it will use personal information can provide more assurance
 to one person than another. Also, a particular individual may
 or may not agree with the disclosed information handling
 4We also tested two alternative models in which control is modeled as a
 subdimension of information management, with and without the third-order
 general factor of IPC. The fit indices for these models are lower than Models
   and , supporting the view of control as a subdimension of interaction
 management rather than of information management.
    

 /Internet Privacy Concerns
 practices adopted by a website. Hence, this type of items may
 be more appropriate for the research context where the main
 purpose is to understand the status of existing information
 handling practices of companies or websites.
 Finally, items measuring expectation of others' behavior
 typically start with "Companies should...," "Companies
 should not...," "I want a website to...," etc. These items
 reflect the expectations that individuals hold toward
 companies or websites in terms of the practices that should be
 adopted to handle their personal information. A problem with
 this type of measures is that they may provide misleading
 responses, as it costs individuals virtually nothing to expect
 and demand greater protection of their privacy . For example, while most people will
 respond positively to a statement such as "Websites should
 protect personal information they collect from unauthorized
 secondary usage," it does not necessarily imply that they are
 concerned that websites are not doing the right things to
 protect them, nor does it necessarily inhibit them from
 providing their personal information online. This may explain
 why online consumers do not always act in line with their
 stated privacy p . Hence, phrasing items in terms of expectation may
 result in the measurement of a completely different construct
 from IPC.
 The differences in wording of items can have an impact on
 empirical validations of information privacy concerns and
 IPC. For instance, in 's  instrument, the
 items measuring the collection dimension are phrased as
 perception of one 's concern for others ' behavior , while items
 measuring the errors, secondary usage, and improper access
 dimensions are phrased as expectation of others ' behavior .
 Tables  and  report the means of the four dimensions and
 their intercorrelations respectively in published empirical
 studies . As
 Table  shows, the collection dimension has a lower mean
 than the other three dimensions in  out of the   pairs of
 possible comparisons . This is surprising as collection
 is a necessary antecedent to the other three dimensions, and
 has been recognized as one of the most important dimensions
 of information privacy .
 Table  also shows that the collection dimension has a lower
 average correlation than the other three dimensions  in prior studies that used Smith et
 al. ' s  instrument. In view of the differences in wording
 of the items and the pattern of empirical data in past studies,
 there is a possibility that the existing items measuring the
 collection dimension may be tapping into a different construct
 from the items measuring the other three dimensions. Recent
 studies using the instrument either showed that the collection
 dimension does not converge well with the other three
 dimensions of IPC , or have
 omitted the collection dimension in their measurement of IPC
 . In summary, the
 inconsistency in wording of items may affect the measurement of IPC.
 Methodology
 We conducted a series of studies to validate the alternative
 models of IPC that are derived from the various theoretical
 frameworks based on MDT. Figure  presents a roadmap of
 the four studies. Study  collected data on individuals' IPC
 with commercial websites using items from existing instruments for the purpose of comparing the integrated conceptualization of IPC, which included six key dimensions, against
 two popular existing conceptualizations of IPC in prior
 research. Study  cross-validated the findings of study  on
 a new sample of individuals' IPC with government websites,
 and examined the impact of inconsistent wording of items in
 the original instruments. Study  collected additional data on
 individuals' IPC with commercial websites using revised
 wording of the items and reevaluated the factor structure of
 the integrated conceptualization of IPC through a number of
 higher-order models. Finally, study  cross-validated the
 findings of study  on a new sample of individuals' IPC with
 government websites and assessed the nomological validity of
 the integrated conceptualization of IPC.
 Study 
 The objectives of study  are to allow comparison with prior
 research using items from existing instruments, and to
 compare the integrated conceptualization of IPC  against two
 popular existing conceptualizations of IPC. An online survey
 was conducted over a period of four weeks. We posted a
 banner advertisement of the survey on the homepage of a
 Hong Kong website. Incentives in the form of lucky draw
 prizes were offered to participants in the online survey. A
 total of  participants provided complete data for analysis.
 Table  presents the demographics for the sample.
 We used items from established instruments to measure the
 six key lower-order dimensions of IPC. Items for collection,
 errors, secondary usage, and improper access were taken from
   
 /Internet Privacy Concerns
 Study  Study  Study  Study 
  . Compare the baseline  • Examine impact of  . Resolve inconsistent  . Cross-validate the
 integrated concep- inconsistent wording wording of items and findings of study 
 tualization of IPC of items in original adopt a common using a new sample,
 against two popular instruments. perspective in . Assess the nomoconceptualizations in . Cross-validate the Hv measuring IPC. Ply logical
 the literature. findings of study  . Evaluate the alter- the best fitting theo-
 . Replicate prior studies using a new sample. native integrated retical model of IPC
 using items from conceptualizations of identified in study .
 existing instruments IPC with a new
 Study  Study  Study  Study 
 Sample Size    
 "Mean Age . . . .
 Gender  %/% %/%
 , and items for cont
 taken from . T
 were selected as they have undergone
 testing. To reduce the length of the que
 the three items with the highest load
 . The items were ad
 context by replacing "companies" wit
 sites." Seven-point Likert scales with 
 "strongly disagree" to "strongly agre
 items. The questionnaire was pilot tes
 5We selected instruments that are most commonly
 their construct validity has been established th
 analysis. Both 's and Malhotra et 
 criteria. 's instrument is probably the
 of privacy concern that has been used widely a
 various disciplines. Using existing instruments also 
 findings with those of prior research, and see 
 can affect the factor structure of even well-established instruments. This
 effort is imperative in terms of facilitating knowledge accumulation and
 knowledge development.
 public university and was found to be reliable and valid .
 Table  presents the descriptive statistics of the six key firstorder factors. The mean of the collection dimension was
 significantly lower than those of the other five dimensions,
 possibly due to the different wording/perspective adopted by
 the original items. We then examined four models of IPC.
 Model  was Stewart and Segars's  second-order factor
 model with 's four first-order factors. Model 
 was 's second-order factor model with three
 first-order factors. Model  hypothesized a model with six
 correlated first-order factors . Finally, Model 
 imposed a second-order factor on the six first-order factors.
 We used LISREL to conduct confirmatory factor analysis
 . Models  and  showed good fit with the data . All fit indices were within the recommended ranges
 . As the two models were not nested within
 each other, we examined the AIC and CAIC fit indices.
 Model  had smaller AIC and CAIC, indicating a better fit.
 This is consistent with , but should be interpreted with care as AIC and CAIC favor simpler models by
 taking parsimony  into
 account as well as fit . Thus,
 
 /Internet Privacy Concerns
The factor loadings of two dimensions  on the second-order factor were also
 lower than in Model . Hence, Model 
 did not provide satisfactory performance over Model .
 This result suggests that IPC may be a higher-order construct,
 as a single second-order factor cannot sufficiently explain the
 relationships among the first-order factors. There are two
 possible explanations:  the inconsistency in the wording of
 existing instruments may have affected the empirical
 validation of the factor structure of IPC, and  the six firstorder factors belong to more than one higher-order factor,
 consistent with the predictions of the various theoretical
 frameworks based on MDT, and thus do not converge into a
 single second-order factor. We examined these possibilities
 in studies  and .
 Study 
 The objective of study  is to cross- validate the findings of
 study  with a new sample and examine the impact of inconsistent wording of items. We used the same items, except for
 replacing "commercial websites" with "government websites." The rationale is that if items measuring secondary
 usage, errors, and improper access in 's instrument
 are indeed measuring expectations, then individuals' expectations of government websites should be somewhat similar
 to their expectations of commercial websites , given that it costs individuals virtually nothing to
 expect more privacy protection. On the other hand, if items
 measuring the collection dimension are indeed reflecting
 individuals' perceptions of their privacy concerns, and given
 that a recent study shows that Hong Kong residents hold
 greater privacy concerns for data collected by the commercial
 sector than by government agencies , we
 should find lower concerns for personal information collection by government websites than by commercial websites.
 Using a similar method as study  , we collected data from  
 new respondents. The demographics of the respondents in
 study  were similar to study  .
 Similar to the results for commercial websites, the means of
 the "expectation" dimensions are consistently higher than the
 mean of the collection dimension, with the differences
 ranging from . to . . Comparing the
 means of the dimensions in study  and study , we found a
 much larger difference in the collection dimension  than in the other five dimensions . The data supports our argument that
 while individuals' perceptions of concerns for information
 collection are significantly lower for government websites
 than for commercial websites, they have similar expectations
 for both types of websites in protecting their privacy.
 The CFA results for the four models were similar to study .
 While the fit indices were all acceptable, Model  again failed
 to provide sufficient performance improvement against Model
 , with a target coefficient  of only .. Also, the factor
 loading of the collection dimension on the second-order factor
 was lower than the recommended value. Hence, study  helps
 us to verify the first possible explanation at the end of study
  that inconsistency in the wording of existing instruments
 can affect the empirical validation of the factor structure of
 IPC. We resolved the wording inconsistency and reexamined
 the factor structure of IPC in study .
 Study 
 The objectives of study  are to resolve inconsistency in the
 wording of the original items, and to reevaluate the factor
 structure of the integrated conceptualization of IPC against
 alternative higher-order models developed from the various
 theoretical frameworks using MDT. In order to focus on individuals' perceptions of their concerns for website behavior
 rather than their expectations of website behavior , we
 rephrased the items to start with either "I am concerned that
 websites ..." or "It usually bothers me when websites ..." . Similar types of phrasing had been used in
 more recent privacy instruments . Using a similar
 method as study , we collected data from  new
 respondents about their IPC with commercial websites using
 the rephrased instrument.
 Compared to the earlier studies, the means of the six dimensions were now in a closer range, with the differences
 between the mean of the collection dimension and the other
 five dimensions ranging between -. and . .
 The changes to the wording of the items appeared to have
 resolved the inconsistency issue. We then proceeded with
 CFA to examine the factor structures of the alternative
 conceptualizations of IPC.
 We first examined Model  
 with the new data . Model  continued to show
 good fit with all fit indices falling into recommended ranges.
 Present tests of reliability, convergent validity,
 and discriminant validity of the six first-order factors. Cron  
. Hence, Model  demonstrates good reliability. The
 reliability, convergent validity, and discrimin
 While Model  also showed good model fit with
 falling into recommended ranges, the T coeffici
 ., implying that a single second-order facto
 adequately account for the correlations among th
 factors. However, the moderately high correla
 the first-order factors  provided e
 port for the presence of higher-order factor m
. We proceeded to examine the alternative higher
 Model  as the baseline model and compared it t
 higher-order factor models in subsequent analy
 Table  presents the goodness-of-fit indices fo
 alternative models  develope
 various theoretical frameworks identified by M
 these models were nested within Model . As nested models
 could never have better fit than their baseline model, we
 looked for a nested model that was more parsimonious and
 with the closest fit indices to those of Model . The results
 showed that models that hypothesized a third-order factor
  consistently performed better than
 their corresponding lower-order factor models . This supports our conceptualization of IPC as a
 higher-order construct with a general factor of IPC encompassing the lower-order factors. Further, Model  had
 significantly better fit than the alternative models, and its fit
 indices were the closest to those of the baseline Model . The
 T coefficient was ., indicating reasonable performance of
 Model  over Model . Model  also showed much better
 fit than Model , indicating a third-order factor explained the
 data much better than a single second-order factor. In
 addition, factor loadings from lower-order indicators to
 higher-order factors were all larger than .. Given the
 parsimony of Model , its reasonable performance over the
 baseline model, and the high factor loadings, we concluded
 that Model  best represents the factor structure of IPC.
 The empirical results provide support for the interaction
 management and information management dimensions of IPC.
 These two dimensions represent two main areas from which
 online consumers' privacy concerns may arise. On one hand,
 consumers are concerned about losing control of their
 personal information when interacting with websites, in terms
 of how their personal information is collected and used by
 websites. For example, many websites, such as Travelocity,
 use business intelligence software to track consumers' search
 behavior and use the data to predict consumers' needs and
 make personalized recommendations. While such a personalized service may provide convenience to consumers, it also
 raises their privacy concerns about the websites using their
 personal data without their approval. Online consumers are
 also concerned whether websites are doing their best to
 protect the confidentiality of their personal information. For
 example, there have been high profile incidents of credit card
 information leaks that could potentially affect millions of
 consumers .
 The results also help to clarify the role of control in IPC.
 Based on MDT, we have conceptualized two different roles
 of control. In accordance with theoretical framework 2a, the
 control dimension was hypothesized to be an independent
 dimension that is correlated with the interaction management
 dimension in Model , while in Model  the control dimension is hypothesized to be a subdimension of interaction
 management following theoretical framework 2b. As Model
  has better fit indices than Model , our results provide
 support for the conceptualization of control as a part of the
    
 /Internet Privacy Concerns
 interaction management dimension. In other words, individuals may not perceive that they have control over the
 information management practices adopted by websites.
 Finally, our results provide support for the conceptualization
 of awareness as a unique passive dimension of privacy concerns . Awareness is somewhat independent of the other dimensions,
 because no matter what interaction management or information management practices are adopted by a website, it can
 choose to let individuals be aware of it or not. For example,
 a website may or may not inform individuals when their
 personal information is collected, what type of information is
 collected, or whether their personal information will be used
 for a different purpose. Similarly, a website may or may not
 let individuals know when their personal information is
 jeopardized by unauthorized access to its database. The
 Federal Trade Commission surveyed , websites and
 found that out of the  percent that collected data about
 visitors, only  percent revealed how that data was used
 . Hence, individuals' information privacy
 could be infringed without their awareness of the interaction
 management and information management practices of the
 websites. Awareness constitutes a unique dimension in addition to the interaction management and information
 management dimensions.
 A limitation of the data analysis is with regard to the identification issue in LISREL. A latent variable needs at least
 three indicators to be identified, meaning the number of
 correlations among the indicators is exactly equal to the
 number of parameters needed to define the third-order factor
 . The third-order factor in Model  was just
 identified, which made it indistinguishable from its corresponding lower-order model  from a statistical
 sense. To test such models, additional constraints need to be
 imposed . Following ,
 we fixed the error terms of the two second-order factors in
 Model  to be equal in order to address the identification
 issue. The fit indices of the revised model were very similar
 to those of the original model, providing evidence that Model
  was statistically better than Model . From another
 perspective, Model  had four indicators for its third-order
 factor, which made it over-identified. As Model  provided
 better fit with the data than its corresponding lower-order
 model , it was added assurance of the existence of
 the third-order factor. Similar practices can be found in the
 psychology literature when treating complex higher-order
 factors with identification issues .
 Finally, the influence of common method variance 
 can be an important issue for this research, as the observed
 superiority of the third-order factor models over alternative
 models may be attributed to the cross-sectional data collection. We conducted the marker variable test, which is
 recognized as an effective tool for accounting for CMV
 . A marker variable is believed to be
 theoretically unrelated to at least one substantive variable, but
 susceptible to the same causes of CMV. We selected knowledge of the Internet as a marker variable. Following Lindell
 and Whitney , we used the second lowest positive
 correlation between the marker variable and the six first-order
 factors as a conservative estimate of shared correlation
 resulting from CMV. We found that the second lowest positive correlation was ., which was low and nonsignificant.
 Based on this estimate, we calculated CMV-adjusted correlations using the equation developed by Lindell and
 Whitney to partial out method variance. The results showed
 that the differences between the original and the CMVadjusted correlations were very small ,
 suggesting that CMV did not present a major threat to our
 analysis.
 Study 
 The objectives of study  are to cross-validate the findings of
 study  using a new sample, and to assess the nomological
 validity of the integrated conceptualization of IPC. From
 study , our data analysis has identified Model  as having
 the best fit with the data. Using a similar method as study ,
 we collected data from another  respondents. This time,
 we used the rephrased items from study  and changed
 "commercial websites" to "government websites." The demographics of the respondents in study  were similar to study
  .
 In congruence with study , the means of the six dimensions
 were in a closer range with each other, ranging from -. to
 . . The CFA results were also similar to
 study , with Model  having the best fit with the data. Its
 T coefficient was ., and its fit indices were the closest to
 the baseline Model . Factor loadings were above . for all
 first-order factors and all higher-order factors, confirming the
 third-order factor structure. Hence, the cross-validation confirmed the findings of study .
 Nomological validity is the degree to which predictions from
 a formal theoretical network containing the concept under
 scrutiny are confirmed . A critical step
 in assessing the efficacy of a higher-order factor is to study its
 relationship with theoretically related constructs within a
 nomological network . Following , we examined the relationship between IPC and two
    
  . Many researchers believe that privacy concern is likely to be a construct that evolves as computer-based
 information technologies become more pervasive . In response to this, researchers advocate taking theory-driven approaches to investigate this dynamic construct, such that the scale would not be
 specific to any particular privacy-threatening technologies,
 which are continuously evolving .
 Following the above evocation, we have adopted a theorydriven approach to identify the dimensionality of IPC
 , which helps
 to increase our faith in the stability of its factor structure. The
 key lower-order dimensions were identified through an extensive literature review, which reflects the contemporary
 perceptions of scholars and consumers toward information
 privacy and online information privacy in particular. Nevertheless, future research needs to ensure these key lower-order
 dimensions of IPC will still be relevant with new developments in technologies. For example, if advances in technology successfully eliminate the possibility of gaining
 improper access to databases that hold personal information,
 then improper access will cease to be a significant privacy
 concern of Internet users. Take another example: Although
 the information obtained through unauthorized monitoring
 and analysis can be used to provide better services to Internet
 users , such practices are often
 conducted without their awareness, and the information may
 be used for a secondary purpose. While these practices are
 related to the key dimensions of IPC, they may have their own
 unique characteristics. Hence, future research can reevaluate
 the lower-order dimensions of IPC on a periodic basis,
 especially after significant social and technological changes
 which may impact Internet users' privacy perceptions.
 Second, researchers have noted the importance of context in
 studying information privacy . As our studies were conducted in an Asian country,
 future research can test our conceptualization of IPC in other
 countries. Third, it will be useful to perform factorial
 invariance tests on the integrated instrument of IPC across
 different demographics  to further validate our conceptualization of IPC
 Finally, the integrated conceptualization of IPC can be used
 in a nomological network to investigate the antecedents and
 consequences of IPC in a particular research context. For
 example, it would be interesting to examine the impact of IPC
 on consumers' online behavior through longitudinal studies.
 Conclusions
 Based on MDT and an extensive literature review, we have
 identified various conceptualizations of IPC. We then consolidate the existing knowledge about information privacy b
 developing an integrated conceptualization of IPC whic
 consists of a third-order general factor, two second-orde
 factors of interaction management and information manage
 ment, and six first-order factors . Th
 reliability and validity of this integrated conceptualization o
 IPC were validated through a series of four studies involvin
 large-scale online surveys. As a result, this research h
 contributed to building a better understanding of th
 conceptualization of IPC and provided a modified instrumen
 for future research into IPC.

