Privacy in the Digital Age: A Review of Information Privacy Research in Information
Systems

 Information privacy refers to the desire of individuals to control or have some influence over data about
 themselves. Advances in information technology have raised concerns about information privacy and its
 impacts, and have motivated Information Systems researchers to explore information privacy issues, includin
 technical solutions to address these concerns. In this paper, we inform researchers about the current state 
 information privacy research in IS through a critical analysis of the IS literature that considers informatio
 privacy as a key construct. The review of the literature reveals that information privacy is a multilevel concept,
 but rarely studied as such. We also find that information privacy research has been heavily reliant on studen
 based and USA-centric samples, which results in findings of limited generalizability. Information privacy
 research focuses on explaining and predicting theoretical contributions, with few studies in journal articles
 focusing on design and action contributions. We recommend that future research should consider different
 levels of analysis as well as multilevel effects of information privacy. We illustrate this with a multileve
 framework for information privacy concerns. We call for research on information privacy to use a broader
 diversity of sampling populations, and for more design and action information privacy research to be published
 in journal articles that can result in IT artifacts for protection or control of information privacy.
 Keywords: Information privacy, privacy, level of analysis, information privacy framework, information
 privacy concerns
 Introduction
 The concept of information privacy existed long before information and communication technologies changed its occurrences, impacts, and management. In the mid-1980s, Mason
 1M. Lynne Markus was the accepting senior editor for this paper. Paul
 Pavlou served as the associate editor.
 The appendices for this paper are located in the "Online Supplements"
 section of the MIS Quarterly's website .
  suggested that the advent of the increased use of information technologies, or the Information Age, would lead to
 four major concerns about the use of information: privacy,
 accuracy, property, and accessibility . This prediction
 proved to be accurate for each area, and particularly for
 privacy, which has been the subject of increasing concern
 over the years. A Pew Internet Project survey found that 85
 percent of adults believed it was "very important" to control
 access to their personal information .
 Information privacy is also an important concern for corporations. In a survey, 85 percent of responding companies
 

All use subject to 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 experienced some sort of repor privacy breach during the
 previous year; 63 percent reported multiple breaches. The
 majority of the reporting companies stated that they spent
 their time reacting to privacy breaches as opposed to being
 proactive in their attempts to prevent them .
 Information privacy can be defined in many ways. While
 Clarke  states "privacy is often thought of as a moral
 right or a legal right" , many researchers have suggested that privacy is one's ability to control information
 about oneself . No
 matter how privacy is defined, it is clear that the issues surrounding privacy are myriad and of a varied nature. As such,
 information privacy has been studied not only by IS
 researchers, but also by researchers in marketing, law, management, psychology, and many other fields. In this paper,
 we explore the construct of information privacy within the
 information systems domain. This paper aims to inform
 researchers about the current state of information privacy
 research in IS through a critical analysis of the literature. The
 paper also aims to inform practitioners with a global view of
 the current state of IS academic knowledge on information
 privacy.
 This review provides several findings and contributions for
 the literature. First, we identify a wide variety of topics
 relevant to the information privacy construct and show that
 information privacy can be studied at multiple levels of
 analysis, although rarely considered as a multilevel concept.
 We recommend that future research should consider different
 levels of analysis as well as multilevel effects of information
 privacy, and illustrate this with a multilevel framework for
 information privacy concerns. We also find that information
 privacy research has been heavily reliant on student-based and
 USA-centric samples, which results in findings of limited
 generalizability. We provide suggested directions and
 research questions that can be studied with a broader diversity
 of sampling populations. Finally, we find that information
 privacy research focuses largely on explaining and predicting
 theoretical contributions, with few studies in journal articles
 focusing on design and action contributions. We call for
 more design and action information privacy research to be
 published in journal articles as opposed to mainly being
 available through conference proceedings. However, we
 recognize that publishing such design and action research in
 journals would likely require more interdisciplinary research.
 Literature Review
 Information privacy is a subset of the overall concept of
 privacy, which has been explored and discussed for centuries.
 suggest that most interpretations of the
 concept of privacy refer to a human right, but within different
 contexts. Those contexts led Clarke  to identify four
 dimensions of privacy: privacy of a person, personal behavior
 privacy, personal communication privacy, and personal data
 privacy. Today, as most communications are digitized and
 stored as information, personal communication privacy and
 data privacy can be merged into the construct of information
 privacy. This review focuses on information privacy because
 most privacy-related IS research has focused on this construct. This singular focus is not surprising since technology
 is driving many concerns  related to
 information privacy. Specifically, with the advent of
 advanced information and communication technologies, data
 can be collected, aggregated, and analyzed at a faster pace
 and in larger volume than ever .
 Further, data can be collected without individuals' awareness
 .
 There are many definitions for information privacy, but there
 is little variance in the elements of the definitions, which
 typically include some form of control over the potential
 secondary uses of one's personal information . Secondary use refers to the practice of using data for
 purposes other than those for which they were originally
 collected. identify four dimensions of
 information privacy: collection, unauthorized secondary use,
 improper access, and errors. Another taxonomy includes
 information collection, information processing, information
 dissemination, and invasion . propose a taxonomy of information privacy in collaborative environments focused on time, matter, and space
 dimensions; the space dimension reflects the structural view
 of information privacy, which includes individual, group, and
 organizational privacy. Clarke defined information privacy
 specifically as "the interest an individual has in controlling, or
 at least significantly influencing, the handling of data about
 themselves." For the purpose of our study, we rely on this
 definition of information privacy.
 In order to explore the information privacy construct in IS
 research, we conducted an in-depth review of the literature in
 several stages. To be included in our review, each journal
 article had to include information privacy as a key construct.
 We use several frameworks concurrently to perform an
 analysis of the literature. First, we use Gregor' s 
 framework of theory classifications to evaluate the theoretical
 contributions made by the information privacy literature. As
 suggested by Gregor, researchers can gain significant insights
 into a research domain by identifying the types of theories
 used within the domain. Second, we use the structural view
 of information privacy proposed by to classify 


 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 the literature based on the levels of analysis. In addition to
 the individual, group, and organizational levels that propose, we also include a societal level to capture
 information privacy that is studied within or across national
 or cultural regions, as proposed by .
 The first stage in our search for the literature involved
 identifying papers on information privacy in the AB I/Informs
 database. Using those keywords, 340 articles were listed as
 relating to information privacy. We then proceeded to extract
 from this list research related to information systems and
 information privacy. In the preliminary screening, we
 removed articles that were either anonymous short stories,
 s of contents, interviews with experts, opinion pieces,
 papers listed more than once, or articles focused on security
 but appearing in journals with information privacy in the
 journal title. We also removed articles presenting legal
 reviews and commentaries since our focus was on information
 privacy research in IS, and on papers that we could code for
 theoretical foundations, sample characteristics, and level of
 analysis. Most legal articles provide legal discussions and
 commentaries on laws related to information privacy.
 Readers interested in legal aspects of information privacy can
 refer to Appendix A for a substantial list of papers discussing
 this aspect of information privacy. In total, we removed 2 1 8
 articles. Appendix A explains this detailed screening and
 provides the list of removed articles. We then examined the
 remaining 122 articles for in-depth coding.
 The papers were jointly coded for topic area, key constructs,
 theoretical contributions, and methodology. Details of this
 coding are presented in Appendices В and C. As a result of
 our coding efforts, an additional 52 papers were removed
 from the list of journal articles. These included editorial
 prefaces, security focused articles, commentaries, opinions
 pieces that were missed in our initial screening, book reviews,
 "how to" articles , conference panel session
 summaries, papers listed twice under different naming or that
 were identical but in different journals, and papers that were
 not focused on information privacy research, such as papers
 on studies of supply chains with side mention of information
 privacy, studies of general healthcare privacy, and studies or
 discussions of chief privacy officers.
 For the second stage of literature review, we identified over
 100 additional papers through further investigation of references from the papers identified in the first stage. Our initial
 screening  resulted in 72 additional
 papers being coded. The first 20 papers were coded independently by both authors, who achieved a Cohen's kappa of
 75 percent. Given that Cohen kappas above 0.60 are considered to show substantial agreement , one of the authors coded the remaining articles,
 requesting feedback on difficult to classify articles. Coding
 details are provided in Appendix B. The resulting sample of
 142 coded journal articles papers is included in Appendices
 С and D.
 The final stage of the literature review involved searching
 conference proceedings databases to identify papers discussing information privacy to  verify if trends identified
 in the coding of the journal articles were also found in
 conference proceedings, and  identify any topic areas or
 trends emerging from conference papers that were not
 identified in the coding of journal articles. We investigated
 284 articles . Details of the procedures,
 articles, and coding are provided in Appendix E.
 Findings
 In total, we reviewed over 500 articles, and coded 142 journal
 articles and 102 conference proceedings papers. The review
 revealed several important insights about information privacy
 research in Information Systems. First, there is a wide variety
 of topics relevant to the information privacy concept of
 interest to IS researchers. Second, information privacy
 research focuses largely on explaining and predicting theoretical contributions, with few studies in journal articles
 focusing on design and action contributions. Third, information privacy research in IS has been heavily reliant on
 student-based and USA-centric samples. Finally, information
 privacy can be studied at multiple levels of analysis, although
 it is rarely considered as a multilevel concept by IS
 researchers. We explore each of these issues as related to the
 existing research more in-depth in the following sections, and
 discuss the implications of these findings.
 Topics in IS Information Privacy Research
 IS researchers have studied information privacy through a
 number of lenses, discussing a wide variety of topics. As can
 be seen in Appendix D, some topics appear more often in
 journal articles than others, in particular research related to
 information privacy concerns, e-business impacts of information privacy, and information privacy attitudes and practices. We briefly discuss important findings from these major
 . 35 No.  1019

All use subject to 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 streams of research. Articles in information privacy topic
 areas less frequently researched can be identified in
 Appendices A, B, D, and E. These include papers on trust,
 culture, security, economics of information privacy, surveillance, personalization, risk, marketing, and control, among
 others. An additional topic area that needs to be briefly discussed is the tools and technologies for information privacy.
 There are two reasons to highlight this topic even if it does
 not appear regularly in journal articles. First, from a design
 science perspective, tools and technologies represent the main
 contributions expected from design and action theories, as
 discussed in our analysis of theoretical contributions. Second,
 our review of the literature in conference proceedings reveals
 that a large number of tools are published in conference
 proceedings rather than in traditional journal outlets.
 Information Privacy Concerns
 Research on information privacy concerns is clearly of
 importance to IS researchers, and typically seeks to explain
 differences in levels of privacy concern or to explore the
 effects of privacy concerns on various dependent variables,
 such as the willingness to provide personal information or the
 willingness to transact online. Internet privacy concerns
 represent individuals' perceptions of what happens with the
 information they provide via the Internet . More specifically, many researchers have adopted the
 definition of privacy concerns as focusing on the concerns
 individuals have with the information privacy practices of
 organizations . Others have defined privacy concerns more broadly as the "individual's subjective
 views of fairness within the context of information privacy"
 . Findings suggest that information privacy concerns influence individuals' attitudes, such
 as their p for regulatory environments and willingness to be profiled . They also influence individuals' acceptance of technology, such as their intentions to purchase online .
 Most studies use one of two instruments: concern for information privacy  or Internet user's information privacy
 concerns . CFIP was the first of these to be developed and tested. CFIP has four dimensions including collection of data, unauthorized secondary use of data, improper
 access to data, and errors in data . The
 CFIP scale is composed of 15 items. A later study of the
 CFIP scale showed that each of its dimensions serves as a
 second order factor that make up the concern for information
 privacy construct . A few years
 later, the IUIPC construct was developed and included three
 dimensions: control, awareness, and collection . The resulting scale is composed of 10 items. When
 developing the IUIPC scale, show that
 IUIPC explains more of the variance in a person's willingness
 to transact than CFIP. There are many
 recent papers that continue to use CFIP instead of IUIPC
 . A number of studies also included the
 influence CFIP has on behavioral intentions  or
 privacy actions .
 Recent research in conference proceedings indicates that the
 trend continues with CFIP more widely used than IUIPC,
 although some studies do use IUIPC . Of
 note, when using secondary data, researchers have sometimes
 controlled for privacy concerns instead of measuring them
 with one of the two instruments described above . Given the availability of welltested instruments and the impacts information privacy concerns have on attitudes and behaviors, future studies should
 definitely measure concerns. Future research in this domain
 could use meta analyses to compare the two instruments
  beyond the comparisons provided by the
 developers of IUIPC. In addition, studies should explore the
 differences in antecedents and consequences of both constructs. If findings suggest that both CFIP and IUIPC are
 equally important and valid, then explanations of why each
 instrument is selected need to be clearly provided by
 researchers. Or, as one study recently did, use both constructs
 if appropriate .
 Information Privacy and E-Business Impacts
 This area of research typically studies how individuals' views
 of privacy affect their intention to participate in e-commerce
 or e-government interactions, or their willingness to share
 information with e-commerce merchants or e-government
 agencies. Several studies also compare individual differences
 across national borders. Results show that concerns related to
 information privacy, along with other factors, affect individuals' intentions to use online services , with greater concerns
 leading to lower intentions. Concerns also lead to individuals
 being less willing to share personal information with websites
 . There are, however, some contradictory findings, with
 some researchers finding that unauthorized use of secondary
 data - a dimension of privacy ,
 privacy concerns , or information privacy protection perceptions  - has little
 impact on online purchasing behavior. A potential explanation for these findings is the role of trust. When trust is considered as a factor together with information privacy, trust is
 more important than privacy when determining Internet
 purchasing intentions .
 However, it is difficult to say whether the role of trust
 explains different findings, or if it is that studies with contradictory results  all used student samples. In a study that
 utilized a nonstudent sample of Internet users, trust  was found to mediate the relationship
 between privacy concerns and willingness to transact online
 . Unfortunately, there are few studies
 exploring these potential mediating effects. The only other
 study that explores mediation finds that Internet literacy -
 "ability to use an Internet-connected computer and Internet
 applications to accomplish practical tasks"  - affects the relationship between privacy and ebusiness, which reduces an individual's level of Internet
 privacy concerns and increases a person's intention to transact
 online. Therefore, future research might explore the possible
 mediating or dominating role of trust when considered
 together with information privacy, as alluded to by some
 researchers .
 Potential mediating variables other than Internet literacy,
 trust, and risk perceptions should be explored, including the
 possibility that the willingness to share information online is
 related to individuals' willingness to transact. One potential
 way to gain this understanding is to utilize a grounded theory
 approach  to develop a theoretical framework for why people have the intentions to perform certain
 privacy practices, similar to recent work on factors influencing parents' intentions to protect their children's privacy
 online .
 In this research, the outcome variable overwhelmingly used
 is intentions to use an electronic service. Research suggests
 there is a privacy paradox, in which a person's intentions to
 disclose their information does not match up to their behavior
 in actually sharing that information . A
 respondent's concerns might lead him or her to state they
 would not use an online service, but when faced with the
 possibility of convenience, their actual behavior might be
 different . Even if other streams of IS
 research suggest that intentions lead to behaviors, the privacy
 paradox should be explored further to provide an understanding as to why such is not the case with information
 privacy. Furthermore, researchers should not assume de facto
 that intentions lead to behaviors when information privacy
 research is conducted.
 Information Privacy Attitudes
 Research on information privacy attitudes often explores
 perceptions of and reactions to information privacy policies,
 practices, and tools. Examples of attitudes include sensitivity
 to sharing or loss of information, or willingness to share
 personal information , and
 reactions to privacy invasive technologies such as instant
 messaging  and RFID  . One issue with research on information privacy
 attitudes is that each study conceptualizes attitudes differently, with some studies focusing on attitudes toward
 privacy in general , as perceptions of
 privacy practices , as
 attitudes toward others' privacy , or as
 attitudes toward data access . While
 all of these are interesting aspects of privacy attitudes to
 explore, there is little commonality to build future research
 upon. Some studies use attitudes as the dependent variable
 , while the majority
 of studies look at privacy attitudes as an independent variable
 that influences behaviors such as creative performance, use
 and acceptance of invasive technologies, and online information disclosure . The most
 intriguing finding in information privacy attitudes research is
 that, in the presence of privacy attitudes, greater concern for
 information privacy no longer influences willingness to
 disclose personal information. For example, as people's
 attitudes change based on being told that fair information
 practices are used to manage their information, their concern
 for information privacy is mitigated enough that they will
 provide personal information online  or will not take actions to protect their privacy . A number of conferences papers  confirm
 these findings. Future studies are needed to understand why
 privacy attitudes impact decisions people make regarding the
 disclosure of information and their willingness to interact with
 invasive technologies.
    Information Privacy Practices

 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 As the review reveals, the majority of research in this area
 focuses intensively on what leads to a person's reactions to
 information privacy attitudes. What is missing in the literature, however, is why individuals react in a certain way. For
 example, monetary incentives  and less sensitivity about the secondary use of data  positively affect students' willingness to disclose information.
 Some studies are starting to explore why individuals act in
 certain ways in the context of electronic surveillance . When employees
 understand why they are being watched they have a better
 attitude toward this invasive practice .
 Another area that needs further exploration for privacy
 attitudes is RFID .
 Information Privacy Practices
 Research on privacy practices often explores individual and
 organizational actions regarding privacy protection or
 infringement, and various factors that affect these practices.
 Individual information privacy practices include using caution
 when divulging information, using privacy protection
 software , falsifying personal information,
 employing passive restraints such as filtering or deleting
 unwanted e-mail, and utilizing identity modification  .
 Factors affecting privacy practices include the types of websites visited and country of origin . Some research
 suggests that individuals are not always aware of the proper
 practices they should employ . Research
 on organizational practices is abundant, and mostly focused
 on analyses of privacy policies of websites and frameworks
 for organizational practices. Researchers typically discuss the
 fair information practices  compliance in privacy policies
 or provide assessments or metrics to investigate the policies.
 Findings suggest companies still do not provide appropriate
 privacy protection for consumers because many do not have
 privacy policies, and when they do, they often do not comply
 with the FIP standards , or they are long and complex
 . One consistent finding is that U.S.
 companies are most likely to have a privacy policy . What is missing from research on
 privacy policies is why companies do not comply with FIP, or
 whether FIP standards are relevant for consumers.
 Information Privacy Tools and Technologies
 Research on information privacy tools and technologies
 typically presents and/or evaluates artifacts or technological
 solutions for dealing with information privacy protection.
 The research often starts with an examination of privacy
 threats and then presents solutions, either technical or conceptual, for addressing those threats. The tools and technologies discussed include both privacy invasive technologies
  and privacy enhancing technologies . This is
 clearly an area with both research and practical implications.
 While there has been a call for more of this type of research
 , the results of this review suggest that this call
 has been mostly answered by computer scientists as opposed
 to IS researchers, and that it has been addressed mostly at the
 conceptual  level as opposed to actual
 implemen and available tools. This only suggests that
 there are many opportunities for IS researchers to be more
 involved in research on information privacy tools and
 technologies.
 One of the most surprising findings from this review is that
 most, if not all, of the research on information privacy tools
 and technologies is conducted in isolation from actual future
 users of the tools. None of the research presented included
 both design of an information privacy tool and subsequent
 evaluation of the tool by its expected users. We believe that
 this is a fruitful area for future research. Such research can be
 conducted using a multidisciplinary team where a tool
 designed by computer scientists or design science researchers
 is informed by IS researchers' understanding of factors that
 influence individuals' use of technology and reactions to
 information privacy. This designed and implemented tool can
 then be evaluated by collecting data from potential users
 through standard research approaches used by IS researchers.
 Clearly, there are many behavioral questions to be explored
 with respect to not only use of potential privacy protection
 tools but also effectiveness and consequences of use.
 Designers often forget to consider how they would measure
 the effectiveness of privacy protection tools, and that is something IS researchers should seek to answer. Similarly, IS
 researchers need to identify the features of privacy protection
 tools that are the most important for consumers. Finally, one
 area of future research that seems likely to gain importance is
 the balancing of information privacy concerns with the
 advantages of location-based services , as hinted at in
 some conference papers , since vendors increasingly explore ways to use
 LBS for marketing purposes.


All use subject to 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 Theory Type Definition
 Analyzing Describe the state of information privacy or the need for information privacy research.
 Explaining Explain what is occurring but do not provide tes predictions.
 Predicting Provide tes predictions without well-developed causal relationships
 Explaining and Predicting Explain what is occurring and provide tes predictions with causal explanations.
 Design and Action Specifically design a tool for providing information privacy or a framework to evaluate such
 tools.
 Theoretical Contributions of Information
 Privacy Research
 We analyzed the theoretical contributions of the information
 privacy articles using an adaptation of Gregor' s 
 proposed framework for classifying theories, which suggests
 that there are five different theory types: analyzing,
 explaining, predicting, explaining and predicting, and design
 and action. The definitions of these categories, as adapted to
 our research domain, are presented in  1.
 Each article in our review was coded for theoretical contributions as presented in Figure 1 and  2, which present a
 summary of online Appendix C. The theoretical classification
 reveals some interesting trends. First, it is clear that the
 majority of information privacy research has focused on
 explaining and predicting theoretical contributions, with
 analytical theoretical contributions as a second major category. A further finding is that very few articles provide
 design and action contributions.
 As can be seen in  2, the majority of research in information privacy concerns, e-business impacts, and information
 privacy attitudes has been devoted to explaining and
 predicting theories. For information privacy concerns, this
 work includes a substantial focus on the development and
 testing of instruments, as previously discussed . This
 approach is consistent with Gregor' s framework, which suggests that theory development starts with analysis of a domain
 followed by explaining and predicting theories. As such,
 other research domains would benefit from this approach, in
 particular privacy attitudes research, which does not have a
 standardized definition for measurement of privacy attitudes.
 Developing a common way of conceptualizing and measuring
 privacy attitudes, using a similar approach to the development
 of the CFIP construct , would be beneficial
 to information privacy research by allowing the work of
 different researchers to build upon one another to provide for
 a more thorough understanding of privacy attitudes.



 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 information sharing by children , human-computer interaction concepts
 to handle privacy concerns , usability studies
 for privacy protection systems , new encryption schemes , various frameworks for exploring better ways to protect individuals' privacy in ebusiness , a P3Pbased privacy preference generator ,
 a website data tracking tool to study usage of privacy tools
 , a tool called iWatch to protect individual
 privacy , a plug-in tag-based
 tool to control privacy in Web 2.0 applications such as
 blogging , a prototype to protect information
 shared on facebook.com , and a tool
 to create and analyze privacy policies .
 Most proposed and/or designed tools are not publicly available, with very few exceptions. The one tool we could find
 that users can use is Privacy Bird ™, which is offered as a
 free download from AT&T. Others, like the privacy preference generator, provide a link to the tool for download.
 Unfortunately, the link does not work at the writing of this
 review. The plug-in for control of privacy for Web 2.0
 application, to our knowledge, has not been made publicly
 available. We believe it would be useful for more tools to be
 downloadable or available for future research to verify prior
 findings, test the tools in different contexts, and allow
 subsequent research to build on existing tools. This would
 also be useful for conceptual tools or proofs of concepts,
 which could be turned into products. Converting conceptual
 frameworks to actual tools is a desired research endeavor
 since frameworks may have fewer practical implications than
 tools. Of course, there are issues of intellectual property to
 tackle, but somehow researchers need tools to be available for
 progress to be made instead of constantly reinventing the
 wheel. Maybe the solution is to develop a centralized
 repository of frameworks and tools that researchers can share
 with each other. Another way to make progress to increase
 the availability of information privacy protection tools would
 be to clearly identify and test a set of common guidelines or
 criteria that design scientists should use for the development
 of privacy protection tools for consumers and for organizations. Finally, it could be that information privacy research
 should be conducted in an open source environment, which
 would enable the code that one group designed to be
 expanded on by another group. This would allow research to
 build incrementally on prior work.
 Researchers should also investigate ways to protect consumers and citizens beyond simple assurances through the
 development of design and action theories that operationalize
 their understanding of information privacy and its impacts.
 For example, they could design tools that reduce the risk of
 online transactions and increase the trust consumers have with
 websites, or tools that would allow people to indicate how
 their privacy attitude changes 
 while they interact with a website. A related search tool that
 would provide results based on factors that may be affecting
 the user's attitude could then utilize this information. Feedback could also be provided to websites about when people's
 attitudes change during their experience visiting the website.
 Companies could modify how they interact with users on their
 website based on this information. Without academic
 researchers involved in the process of making the transition
 from explaining and predicting theories to design and action
 theories, knowledge about information privacy may be lost.
 Sample Characteristics in IS Information
 Privacy Research
    The review of the literature reveals that information privacy
 Respondent Type
 IS researchers often use student samples to explore various
 phenomena, and information privacy research does not escape
 this fact. However, it varies greatly by topic area. For information privacy concerns and privacy attitudes, a significant
 portion of the studies are done using consumers and professionals as opposed to student samples. This suggests that the
 research provides good insights into the privacy concerns and
 attitudes of everyday consumers and that the findings are
 likely to generalize over different populations. 

All use subject to 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 when they utilized student samples , as explained
 earlier in the paper. There is less of an issue of respondent
 type in information privacy practices research, where the vast
 majority of studies are conducted at the organizational level,
 focusing on information privacy policies on websites. The
 few individual level studies in this area often use nonstudent
 samples like consumers , managers , and Internet users .
 IS researchers often discuss how the use of nonstudent
 samples improves generalizability. We argue that student
 studies should not be dismissed, as they provide valuable
 testing and, in reality, students can have privacy concerns and
 attitudes, and are consumers as well. However, students
 might have different concerns than professionals or consumers in general, and may have different buying behaviors.
 In a recent conference paper, Hart  argues that, in the
 context of information privacy, making generalizations based
 solely on student samples may be misleading. Therefore,
 when a large number of studies use student data in a research
 domain , it is important for researchers to compare results
 of student and nonstudent-based studies using meta-analyses
 to identify general differences and similarities in findings.
 Future research also needs to test their proposed relationships
 with nonstudent samples to ensure that findings reflect the
 underlying relationship and not the nature of the subjects
 studied. For example, studies can explore whether students
 exhibit a weaker relationship between privacy and e-business
 use intentions even though they are consumers like everybody
 else .
 They can compare differences in information privacy attitudes
 and information privacy concerns in student and nonstudent
 samples, including people from a wide range of ages,
 incomes, and ethnicities. Results may suggest that further
 research is needed to explore differences across samples in
 antecedents and consequences of information privacy concerns. For example, anecdotal evidence shows that students
 tend to be more willing to give information  than professionals. How do such differences affect
 overall findings regarding information privacy concerns?
 Respondent Origin
 A large number of information privacy research studies have
 been U.S. -centric, with few samples drawn from other countries. In particular, research on e-business impacts, information privacy attitudes, and even privacy practices provides
 few insights on differences between countries. What is surprising is that information privacy and e-business research, for
 example, should be even more present in other countries since
 many countries are more e-business ready than the United
 States , and have shown substantial growth in
 Internet use in recent years .
 Of note, some recent research using non-U. S . samples do
 appear in conference proceedings, with countries such as
 Dubai, France, New Zealand, South Africa, and Germany
 represented .
 Individuals from different countries can be expected to have
 different cultures, values, and laws, which may result in
 differences in their perceptions of information privacy and its
 impacts. The findings of studies that take a multi-country
 perspective support this expectation. For example, Italians
 showed lower privacy concerns but higher government
 intrusion concerns than Americans ,
 exhibited a weaker relationship between privacy concerns and
 e-commerce use, but a stronger relationship between perceived risk and privacy concerns . This
 highlights the need for researchers to consider whether their
 findings are generalizable to other countries. They often may
 not be, as is the case of e-business research conducted in
 countries other than the United States. In two studies of
 Australian students, one found similar findings as those in the
 United States, but the other found an inverse relationship
 between information privacy  and online purchase behavior . Another Australian study found that privacyactive behaviors, such as reading privacy policies or seeking
 actions related to privacy, are not related to purchasing
 intentions , something contrary to many
 findings of prior research.
 One research area that has benefitted from inputs from countries other than the United States, and as such provides a more
 global view of the concepts, is that of information privacy
 concern, where approximately half of the coded studies used
 a U.S. -based sample, while the others used samples from
 other countries such as Australia, China, New-Zealand, and
 Taiwan. Recent research in conference proceedings pursues
 this trend with studies in South Africa , Japan and New Zealand ,
 India , and Asian countries , to name a few.
 Even research on information practices that focused on
 privacy policies in websites seem to rely heavily on websites
 based in the United States, even though worldwide access is
 available for most companies' policies. Only one study investigated websites for companies specifically based outside the


All use subject to 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 United States, which was Taiwan .
 Some studies do look at companies from various countries in
 addition to the United States, but they rarely make any
 inferences about international comparisons . This is especially troubling considering that websites for companies based outside the United
 States are much less likely to have a privacy policy , and that the types of websites visited and the
 country of origin of respondents affect privacy practices . What is interesting is that most of the research on
 information privacy in general does not take into account the
 nationality of the respondent, assuming that the findings are
 somewhat generalizable. This study suggests otherwise, at
 least with respect to privacy practices. While it is possible
 that citizens of countries where governments have long promoted and enforced legal protection for information privacy
  may be less sensitive to information privacy issues, and
 therefore organizations in these countries are less likely to
 view the need for information privacy policies as crucial, this
 needs to be investigated.
 Studies are needed to provide IS researchers with a deeper
 understanding of information privacy by conducting more
 research in multiple countries. Researchers need to better
 conceptualize their expectations about privacy antecedents
 and consequences in various cultural environments. Studies
 that would help us differentiate privacy attitudes and concerns
 based on cultural or government influences would be of
 interest. Researchers could also compare U.S. privacy practices to those of companies in other countries. Such approaches would provide insights into how companies from
 different countries behave when it comes to protection of their
 customers' privacy. For example, when Google refuses to
 provide the government with the personal information of its
 users  but Yahoo gives up the identity of
 bloggers to another government , one has to
 ask why two companies in the same industry make different
 decisions about protecting their customers' privacy in the
 midst of legal and cultural challenges. Such situations are
 ripe for research where one could explore the conflicting roles
 in which gatekeepers of personal information find themselves.
 Finally, analyses of information privacy from a national and
 cultural perspective, as was done for Japan in ajournai article
  and other Asian countries in conference
 proceedings , could enhance
 information privacy research with a more holistic perspective
 for each country or culture. Such in-depth discussions should
 be provided for other cultures, including African cultures,
 Latin American cultures, or northern European cultures.
 Non-Sampled Studies
 Discussing findings on information privacy tools and technologies research takes on a different meaning since most of
 these studies do not test any construct by requesting information from study participants. Tools are proposed, designed
 and/or evaluated independently of actual or potential users.
 One exception is a tool designed with a particular market in
 mind, the Personal Intrusion Detection, proposed and
 developed by IBM Japan and discussed in that context .
 Summary
 As this discussion highlights, IS research seems to have relied
 heavily on student samples and to have taken a very U.S.-
 centric view of information privacy attitudes, practices, and
 consequences since most of this empirical research is
 conducted with U.S. citizens. While it is possible that these
 findings are a reflection of the journal sample, which included
 English language journals only, it does indicate a trend to
 further investigate. Due to the conflicting findings identified
 in this review and the need for a broader understanding of
 information privacy, a topic of great interest to IS researchers,
 we believe there is a clear need to expand future research on
 information privacy from a sample perspective.
 Structural View of Information Privacy
 A final classification of the literature was based on the structural view  for information privacy, as presented in Appendices D and E, and summarized in for
 journal articles. While identified three
 levels of information privacy - individual, group, and organization - the article by in this issue of MIS Quarterly uses four levels to classify information privacy research:
 individual, group, organizational, and societal. These levels
 were determined after the authors followed a rigorous classification schema as conducted in previous research . These levels of
 analysis serve as a starting point from which to explore the
 construct of information privacy as conceptualized in the IS
 literature. Clearly, even if information privacy is most often
 defined at the individual level , it has implications at other levels, for
 example, when organizations and industries decide to selfregulate or fail to enforce privacy policies .

 the studies are conducted at the individual level. It is not surprising that most research is conducted at this level because
 there are validated instruments that can be used for this
 research, and it is easier to collect and analyze data from a
 large number of individuals using surveys or interviews.
 Finally, many information privacy concepts are conceptualized and understood to be individual-level constructs. For
 example, when most people think of attitudes, it is at the
 individual level. We are not suggesting individual level
 research should not be done. Clearly, there are many avenues
 for future research. For example, research should be conducted on how to improve the privacy practices of
 individuals. In addition, given the high volume of research on
 information privacy concerns at the individual level, we
 would expect more efforts in developing tools for individuals
 to protect their information privacy. There is also a need for
 metrics to evaluate privacy policies from the individual's
 point of view. Such a metric may then be utilized as a
 mediating factor in empirically testing how privacy practices
 differ between individuals. However, given the large number
 of studies at the individual level for most topics, we focus our
 remaining discussion on how information privacy can be
 studied at other levels of analysis.
  The
 larger number of studies on privacy policies may be the result
 of the easier access to the data 
 and the existence of tools such as P3P, which can be used for
 automatic screening of privacy policies or the development of
 privacy policy generators. While not appearing in journal

All use subject to 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 articles, many tools targeting online privacy policies are
 published in conference proceedings . One possible avenue to
 extend this research would be to look at other types of organizations beyond commercial websites, for example, studying
 privacy policies for government agencies.
 Other research typically provides or discusses tools organizations can use to either protect  and/or infringe 
 on consumer information privacy. For example, there are
 discussions of privacy invasive technologies  companies use such as adware and Spyware to infringe on consumers' information privacy , and trust
 seals organizations can use as a means to protect information
 privacy of consumers . What is
 interesting is that very few researchers study information privacy concerns of organizations even though some researchers
 do seem to believe concerns exist since they design and/or
 evaluate tools for companies to use. There seems to be a
 paradox where organizations are concerned with information
 privacy but researchers rarely consider this level of analysis
 in their studies .
 It is surprising that the other topic areas in information
 privacy research do not exhibit a larger number of studies at
 the organizational level. For example, in the context of ebusiness or even e-government, organizations should be
 interested in understanding privacy impacts since privacy
 concerns can affect the ultimate success of the e-commerce or
 e-government initiative . Researchers should explore whether organizations
 have different stakes in information privacy than the consumers they serve. Companies might have their own set of
 privacy concerns for the organization  and related consequences. How do these information privacy concerns
 influence the collaboration and ultimate success of interorganizational systems? Organizations may also have their
 own unique attitudes about privacy. For example, Microsoft
 provides very little privacy protection for its users , while companies like Eli Lilly and Company provide significant amounts of privacy protection .
 These differences could be the result of the sensitivity of the
 information the companies possess, with more sensitive
 information resulting in greater concern. Future studies
 should explore what causes different privacy attitudes and
 concerns within companies and between companies. They
 could also explore how differences in the business model
 companies employ or products they offer influence their
 attitudes about privacy. Action research , case studies , or ethnography
  may be good approaches to gain enough information inside of a company to report on the company's
 perceptions related to information privacy.
 One possible explanation for the lack of organizational
 research is that while organizations are interested in understanding information privacy impacts, researchers have yet to
 tackle these issues. However, gathering information from
 citizens or consumers in general is easier than getting organizations to participate in such research. As proof, even recent
 conference papers  offer only prescriptions for companies regarding information privacy and e-business; there is no data collection.
 Another example is a study that inappropriately claims to
 discuss benefits from the organizational perspective, but
 actually derives a list of benefits from surveys and interviews
 of students . Future research should avoid
 such organizational prescriptions unless they are based on
 relevant samples .
 An area for future research at the organizational level is the
 role of organizational culture on information privacy. Organizational behavior researchers have a long-established tradition
 of studying cultures in organizations. IS researchers should
 build on that research to explore how it affects privacy
 concerns, attitudes, and practices of individuals, their groups,
 and management of the organization. Research shows that
 U.S. corporations have different concerns for information
 privacy than Canadian firms . Since organizational cultures impact how individuals perform tasks and
 live their day-to-day work lives , future research needs to explore the impacts of these
 differences. It is possible also that there is an inverse
 relationship between culture and information privacy in
 organizations. Could different information privacy requirements between organizations create differences in their
 organizational culture?
 At the societal level of analysis, there are typically two main
 approaches to conduct studies related to information privacy.
 First, there are comparisons of information privacy constructs
 between individuals or organizations in two different countries , with many studies
 investigating compliance with FIP standards . These studies tend to be mostly descriptive
 of the differences in standards use. Empirical studies, on the
 other hand, typically involve data collection at the individual
 level but aggregated for comparisons across nations or cultures. Another approach, which provides a more in-depth
 understanding of the privacy constructs, uses differences in culture and cultural values of individuals from different countries, along with other variables, to show their effect on
 privacy constructs . This is
 more challenging from a data collection standpoint since
 researchers need a large enough nonstudent sample from
 several different countries to make valid comparisons.
 We believe that more studies of information privacy should be
 conducted at the societal level of analysis. In doing such
 studies, one should not forget that the societal level of analysis can be broad, including individuals, groups, and organizations embedded into societal phenomena. As corporations,
 social networks, and even governments appeal increasingly to
 a global audience, it is important to understand citizen,
 employee, and consumer information privacy better. For
 example, it is unclear which dimensions of culture  have a greater impact and/or explain differences in information privacy attitudes, concerns, and
 impacts. As a result, studies are needed to help uncover the
 attitudinal differences that affect the behaviors of individuals
 in different countries. Of great interest would also be studies
 of information privacy tools and technologies at the societal
 level, specifically focusing on potential national bias in
 design. Is the design of information privacy tools and technologies focused on the American understanding of information privacy, and is that understanding applicable to the rest
 of the world? In a discussion of enterprise resource planning
 , demonstrate how the ERP system
 implementation in non- Western countries can fail because
 local practices are different. Future research on information
 privacy tools and techniques should likewise be more
 contextually sensitive.
 One of the most interesting findings from the review is that no
 studies exist that focus on the group level of analysis in the IS
 information privacy literature. We argue that group information privacy is a valid category, as also proposed and
 discussed by Skinner et al  and . As
 individuals interact in groups, information privacy can
 become a relevant constraint or enabler . In the
 next section, we specifically discuss the construct of group
 information privacy concerns. We identified another very
 interesting group level construct in information privacy from
 recent conference proceedings: group culture . In these papers,
 researchers discuss how users share information differently in
 various groups and communities that have different cultures
 and characteristics. More studies of the effects of group culture and organizational culture on information privacy practices are needed. Most likely, this will require in-depth qualitative analyses .
 Information Privacy Research as a
 Multilevel Concept

 In many respects, privacy is often an area of conflicting
 desires between organizations and individuals. For example,
 in e-business, consumers desire that their information be used
 only for what is necessary to complete the transaction, while
 companies often desire to make additional money from the
 consumer information they receive. These conflicting desires
 lead to a fine balance in how companies approach their privacy practices. If they push the envelope too far in their
 desire to make a profit, they risk alienating their customer
 base. However, if they do not use the information they have
 to make additional profit, they leave themselves vulnerable to
 other companies filling that niche and providing extra competition for them. Therefore, understanding the desires and
 interactions of both of these groups provides practical insight
 that can be used to further enhance the online experience for
 both companies and the consumer.


 While many studies focus on online privacy policies of
 organizations, few examine the individual' s perceptions about
 these policies. The few studies that attempt to address this
 concern from a multilevel perspective focus on how well FIP
 standards are meeting the needs of consumers. In the context
 of healthcare websites, it was found that privacy policies were
 being developed to satisfy the company's objectives but not
 the consumers' . It is interesting, then, that
 individuals are more likely to provide information to websites
 as the level of privacy guaranteed by the website increases
 . These results may be explained by the
 fact that only half of the population ever read privacy policies
 , or the fact that they do not understand them . If privacy policies are not being read, then
 they may serve more as a means of protection for companies
 than as a means of communicating information to consumers.
 FIP standards were designed to provide a balance between the
 desire of consumers for privacy protection and the desire of
 businesses to derive value from customer information. However, the above findings suggest that perhaps the FIP standards need to be reevaluated to determine whether they truly
 are providing that balance.
 Future research could expand the understanding of privacy
 policies by conducting multilevel research to determine the
 equilibrium point where consumers feel their privacy is adequately protected so they would provide personal information
 and where companies consider they have the freedom they
 need to conduct profi business. The results of this multilevel research could include reevaluating FIP standards,
 resulting in potentially better compliance and consumers
 believing their privacy needs were being met, as suggested in
 a recent conference paper. Given the impacts of
 information privacy on e-business success, researchers could
 also explore how e-businesses could use consumer information privacy p to gain a competitive advantage.
 Businesses and groups within organizations possess vast
 amounts of information they do not want others such as
 competitors, and even business partners, to know about. The
 level of concern for privacy that organizations face may be
 related to the culture of the company and how transparent
 they try to present themselves, or may be industry related.
 Future research could provide a way to measure the privacy
 concerns of businesses and groups, and then try to differentiate the factors that explain these concerns and the related
 consequences in an industry or a society.
 The other combination of levels most studied is the individual
 and societal levels. As explained in the prior discussion of
 societal studies, data is often collected from individuals and
 then aggregated. When properly done, this can provide
 insights at multiple levels of analysis, for example, exploring
 differences in privacy concerns between two nationalities and
 the effects of these differences on intentions to continue as
 previously to transact online . It is
 surprising that there are not more studies published on
 international comparisons on information privacy constructs.
 Future research could use a multilevel framework to gain a
 better perspective of the role information privacy at the group,
 organizational, and societal levels. We further explore the
 multilevel nature of information privacy next.
 A Multilevel Model of Information
 Privacy Concerns
 The results of our analyses reveal that there is much to be
 studied in the realm of information privacy research. The
 results also demonstrate the usefulness of various perspectives
  for analyzing an IS research domain. In this section,
 we combine the results of our prior analyses to further explore
 one particularly popular topic in information privacy, that of
 information privacy concerns. This in-depth analysis starts
 with the premise that information privacy concern is a multilevel concept. Figure 2 serves as an illustration of the
 expected interrelationships between the levels of analysis.
 We discuss the model in detail in the subsequent paragraphs.
 The thematic analysis clearly highlights the fact that information privacy concern is one of the two most studied topics in
 the information privacy literature, particularly at the individual level of analysis. As previously discussed, this may be
 the result of several attempts at providing an instrument to
 measure individual concerns. Consistent with the focus on
 individuals, we start our discussion of the information privacy
 concern multilevel framework at the individual level. The
 model suggests that individuals' information privacy concerns
 are influenced by external factors, such as individual differences. Several individual differences have been studied in
 prior research, such as gender, age, and education. Other
 individual differences could be studied, such as the effects of
 self-efficacy or personality traits like amicability on information privacy concerns. There is also the need to study the
 moderating effects these individual differences could have on
 the linkages between information privacy concerns and
 dependent variables like e-business adoption. Since much has


All use subject to 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 already been said about the individual concern for information
 privacy, we focus the rest of our discussion on the other levels
 and, more importantly, on the relationships across levels as
 they relate to concern for information privacy.
 As with all of the topics identified in the thematic analysis,
 information privacy concern has not been studied at the group
 level, with the exception of the framework and definitions
 provided by . This is surprising since
 groups are one of the predominant structures for work in
 organizations today; individuals often belong to multiple
 teams concurrently .
 We believe group concern for information privacy is a potentially very interesting and fruitful area for future research.
 We define group information privacy concern as the collective concern that group members have regarding the privacy
 of the information the group possesses and has access to.
 In organizational theorists' multilevel research, groups are
 often defined as collectives. A collective is "any interdependent and goal-directed combination of individuals, groups,
 departments, organizations, or institutions" . More importantly, a collective has
 its own constructs, which have their own "structural properties that can exert influence that is independent of the
 interaction that initially cause the construct to emerge" . For example, one well-recognized construct at the
 group level is team cohesion. Others have identified how
 different groups develop their own norms for communication
 and use of technologies . Given that groups have their own identity, structures,
 and constructs, and that they are often in competition with one
 another , it is likely
 that groups have different privacy concerns. This is consistent with findings from prior research on knowledge sharing
 that suggests teams fear loss of autonomy if they grant access
 to their data, which would hinder their ability to accomplish
 their tasks . These group information privacy
 concerns can differ somewhat from those of the individuals
 who are members of the group. A group concern for information privacy may rise to the level of the highest member, be a
 function of the group leader's privacy concerns, or be some
 sort of function of all the group members' privacy concerns
 combined. Research in psychology shows that group attitudes
 can be highly influenced by an assertive member ,
 by the majority in the group , or even
 by the minority in the group .
 The development of this group privacy concern may also
 differ based on the sensitivity of the work that is done within
 the group. For example, while an individual may not worry
 about providing some information online personally, the
 group may have developed a norm that no information related
 to the group is to be made available online. Interestingly, it
 is also possible that individuals' privacy concerns depend on
 what group they are part of. 

All use subject to 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 everyone else in the group is concerned about privacy, an
 individual may feel likewise. The same individual may feel
 less concerned about privacy in another group that is more
 open about sharing information. As a result, we show the
 relationship as a double arrow, indicating possible causal
 relationships in both directions.
 The framework proposes that group information privacy
 concerns are influenced by external factors in addition to
 individual members' concerns for information privacy. One
 example of external factors is group dynamics, which can
 represent a number of variables such as group cohesion, group
 centrality ,
 group distribution , or
 group characteristics such as group size or length of group
 existence. While there is no research at this level, many
 questions could be explored such as
  What tools and procedures could be developed to provide
 groups such as buyer communities with privacy
 protections?
  What are the impacts of group information privacy
 concerns on group communication, performance, and
 interactions?
  How does the group concern for information privacy
 influence communication of the group with other groups?
 How do organizational units  differ in
 their information privacy concerns?
 How should privacy protection tools be designed for
 groups where members use highly collaborative communication tools for their work?
 The framework also suggests an important relationship
 between the individual and group information privacy
 concerns. As previously stated, it is important to realize that
 the group's concerns for information privacy do not represent
 an average of the individual members' concerns. Rather,
 group information privacy concern is the group members'
 normalized view of information privacy concerns, which can
 be higher or lower than the individual members' concerns
 taken as a whole. Since none of the proposed relationships in
 the framework have been studied, many research questions
 can be identified for the relationship between group and
 individual information privacy concerns, such as
  What factors influence the relationship between the
 concern for information privacy for a group and that of
 the individuals within the group?
 Will the group concern for privacy converge towards the
 highest levels of concerns within the group?
 How do individual information privacy concerns influence the use of communication media for group communication?
 How do team structures  affect the privacy concerns of their members?
 Organizational information privacy concerns reflect the overall concern that organizational leaders have regarding the
 privacy of the information the organization possesses and has
 access to. Such concerns typically arise from management
 practices and policies. In past research, concern for information privacy at the organizational level has focused mostly
 on publicly available privacy policies. One would hope that
 organizational privacy policies should reflect the concern for
 information privacy of individuals, but limited research has
 actually explored this potential linkage. One study shows that
 there is no link between individual concerns for information
 privacy and privacy policies set forth by organizations . Rather, organizations use privacy policies for
 their own purposes, which is disconcerting. For future
 research, it may be important to consider the types of organizational privacy concerns: concern for privacy of the organization's information , and concerns for privacy of the organizations' customers. Organizations may have varying incentives to protect both types of
 information. Studies should be conducted comparing individual to organizational information privacy concerns. For
 example,
 How can organizations leverage their understanding of
 their customers' information privacy concerns in
 designing their online offerings?
  Why do organizations not take into consideration consumers' concerns for information privacy in the development of their online offerings?
 As with individuals and groups, an organization's information
 privacy concerns are expected to be affected by external
 factors such as type of industry, the competitive position of its
 product or service, or the regulations it must follow. For
 example, banks have to be more concerned about the privacy
 of their customers' information due to legal mandates in most
 countries. Similarly, large organizations with highly recognizable brand names may be more sensitive to privacy of their
 customers' information as negative reactions to poor handling
 of customer private information can spread rapidly through


All use subject to 
 /Privacy in the Digital Age
 word of mouth . As a result, the
 model shows a relationship between individual and organization privacy concerns. That said, it is surprising that so few
 studies consider the organizational environment when discussing privacy in general, let alone information privacy
 concerns. Some questions that may start researchers in that
 direction include: What is the link between organizational
 characteristics such as size, industry, or governance structure,
 and organizational information privacy concerns?
 Societal information privacy concern refers to the overall
 concerns citizens in societies taken as a whole have for the
 privacy of the information about them. While the overall
 privacy concerns of a nation should reflect the concerns of its
 citizens and organizations, it is clear that government interventions such as laws, regulations, controls, and even
 publicity can substantially affect the relationships between the
 various constituents' concerns and the overall national concerns. Studies of information privacy concerns at the national
 level, as previously mentioned, tend to aggregate concerns of
 groups of citizens. However, focusing solely on the aggregation of individual perceptions may be misleading as to how
 much these represent the decisions made at the national level
 concerning information privacy. For example, organizations'
 information privacy concerns, while not typically measured,
 most probably find their way into national laws and
 regulations regarding privacy through effective and intensive
 lobbying. One just has to recall that seals of approvals arose
 out of the desire of organizations to self-regulate instead of
 facing government regulations regarding the privacy of
 individuals . Therefore, many
 questions arise that are in need of investigation, such as
  How are organizational information privacy concerns
 reflected in the privacy concerns of a society?
 What mediating and moderating effects exist between
 concerns for information privacy of individuals, groups,
 and organizations, and those of the society?
 Comparisons could also occur at specific levels or for specific
 cross-level relationships between nations. As discussed previously, prior literature has only compared information privacy concerns between individuals of different countries. It
 would be very interesting to perform similar comparisons for
 organizations. This could be explored with questions such as
  What are the influences of nationality for information
 privacy concerns of organizations?
  What is the relationship between individual and organizational concerns for information privacy in different
 countries?
 The framework offers a wide variety of potential avenues for
 research; we only briefly discussed various levels of analysis
 and their relationships in the multilevel information privacy
 concern framework. Clearly, a simplified multilevel model
 cannot completely do justice to the complex interrelationships
 between the different levels of privacy we discussed in the
 paper. As a result, the questions presented in this section and
 the previous one only represent a few ideas that could be
 explored by IS researchers with respect to information
 privacy.
 Implications and Recommendations 
 We believe that all of the topics identified in the review could
 be further explored by mapping them into a multilevel
 framework as was done for information privacy concerns in
 the previous section. The one conclusion that can be clearly
 reached about information privacy research is that much
 remains to be explored and explained. Yet, we need to
 acknowledge some limitations to our review. First, we did
 exclude some areas of research such as the legal aspects of
 information privacy and the marketing literature on information privacy. While these topics are very important, we
 believe that focusing on topic areas closer to the interests of
 most IS researchers allowed us to present a more systematic
 view of the literature and provide more directed ideas for
 future research. Second, we did not include all of the
 conference proceedings papers on information privacy.
 Nevertheless, by using a sample of the most relevant papers,
 we are able to verify if the trends identified in the journal
 literature are consistent with what is presented at conferences.
 In general, this is the case. However, when the literature is
 not consistent we discussed the differences and consequences
 in the critical analysis of the literature.
 We made a number of recommendations throughout our paper
 about future information privacy research, and even information systems research in general. We have attempted to summarize the most significant recommendations in  4 by
 organizing them into five broad categories. We hope that
 these recommendations and examples will help future
 researcher build on the current work in information privacy.
 Conclusion
 Information privacy is a construct of great interest to IS
 researchers. The continued growth of the digitization of all
 types of information indicates that this concept is likely to
  

All use subject to 
 /P rivacy in the Digital Age
 Recommendation Examples
 1 . Researchers should move beyond  Consider multiple levels of analysis
 the individual and explore other  Study information privacy concerns, impacts, and culture at the
 levels of analysis organizational level, utilizing action research, case studies, and
 ethnography
 Conduct studies that focus on the group level of information privacy
 2. Researchers should utilize a broader  Utilize nonstudent populations
 diversity of sample populations  Utilize non-U. S. centric populations
 Consider comparisons between contextual parts of studies such as U.S.
 versus non-U. S. and student versus nonstudent
 3. Researchers should conduct more  Utilize explaining and predicting research to inform design and action
 design and action research research
 Conduct more interdisciplinary research, capitalizing on different 
 fields' strengths
 Conduct design and action research with an eye towards actual
 implementation
 Make existing design research available to other researchers so r
 can build upon one another
 4. Researchers should conduct more  Utilize the analyzing theories in areas such as privacy 
 studies investigating the why related policies, and privacy practices to inform and drive more
 to privacy as opposed to the how explain and predict
 Investigate why people indicate they won't perform a given behavior, but
 when given the opportunity act contrary to their stated intention
 Investigate the moderating  effect of individual
 characteristics such as self-efficacy on the relationship between CFIP and
 e-business adoption
 5. Researchers should justify their use  Create and utilize more validated instruments so that future privacy
 of existing construct measurements research can more readily build upon one another as has been demonand develop more common strated with the CFIP instrument, in particular focus on a measure for
 measurements to be used across privacy attitudes
 studies  When studying concern for information privacy, provide justification for why
 CFIP or IUIPC was chosen as a measure as opposed to just picking one or
 the other
 gain even more importance in the coming years. When
 looking at the theoretical contributions made in information
 privacy literature, most of the studies that provide explanatory
 and predictive theoretical contributions are found in three
 categories: information privacy concern, e-business impacts,
 and privacy attitudes. Clearly, the fact that instruments have
 been developed for measuring concerns for privacy  has led to more research in this domain, just like the
 largely developed area of technology adoption  impacted research on the relationship between
 information privacy and intentions to use e-business. This
 only reinforces the fact that instruments and theories are
 needed in order for IS researchers to accumulate knowledge
 regarding information privacy . Another major
 finding with respect to theoretical contributions is that few
 papers present design and action research on information
 privacy. As design science becomes an increasingly important area of research, IS researchers should consider the
 development of more  privacy protection
 tools for individuals, groups, organizations, and society. In
 conclusion, information privacy is a very current and exciting
 research domain that will continue to evolve as new technologies and new initiatives such as social networking or
 virtual worlds further push the limit of access to information.
 
