
The Internet of Things paradigm envisions the pervasive interconnection and cooperation of smart things over the current
and future Internet infrastructure. The Internet of Things is, thus, the evolution of the Internet to cover the real-world,
enabling many new services that will improve people’s everyday lives, spawn new businesses and make buildings, cities
and transport smarter. Smart things allow indeed for ubiquitous data collection or tracking, but these useful features are
also examples of privacy threats that are already now limiting the success of the Internet of Things vision when not
implemented correctly. These threats involve new challenges such as the pervasive privacy-aware management of personal
data or methods to control or avoid ubiquitous tracking and proﬁling. This paper analyzes the privacy issues in the Internet
of Things in detail. To this end, we ﬁrst discuss the evolving features and trends in the Internet of Things with the goal of
scrutinizing their privacy implications. Second, we classify and examine privacy threats in this new setting, pointing out
the challenges that need to be overcome to ensure that the Internet of Things becomes a reality.
KEYWORDS
Privacy; Internet of Things; Privacy-enhancing Technology; Legislation; Threats

. INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things  foresees the interconnection
of billions to trillions , of smart things around us
– uniquely identiﬁable and addressable everyday things
with the ability to collect, store, process and communicate
information about themselves and their physical environment . IoT systems will deliver advanced services
of a whole new kind based on increasingly ﬁne-grained
data acquisition in an environment densely populated with
smart things. Examples of such IoT systems are pervasive
healthcare, advanced building management systems, smart
city services, public surveillance and data acquisition, or
participatory sensing applications .
The increasingly invisible, dense and pervasive collection, processing and dissemination of data in the midst
of people’s private lives gives rise to serious privacy
concerns. Ignorance of those issues can have undesired
This is the accepted version of the article:  Ziegeldorf, O. Garcia Morchon,
and K. Wehrle. ”Privacy in the Internet of Things: threats and challenges.”
Security and Communication Networks . : -, which has been
published in ﬁnal form at 
consequences, e.g. non-acceptance and failure of new services, damage to reputation, or costly law suits. The public
boycott of the Italian retailer Benetton in  , the
revocation of the Dutch smart metering bill in  ,
or the recent outcry against the EU FP7 research project
INDECT  are only three examples of IoT related
projects that experienced huge problems due to unresolved
privacy issues.
Privacy has been a hot research topic in different technology and application areas that are important enablers
of the IoT vision, e.g. RFID, wireless sensor networks
, web personalization, and mobile applications and
platforms. Despite considerable contributions from these
communities a holistic view of arising privacy issues in the
IoT is missing, since the IoT is an evolving concept that
comprises a growing number of technologies and exhibits
a range of changing features. Among these, we witness an
explosion in the number of smart things and new ways
of interacting with systems and presenting feedback to
users. As we will show, these new features of the IoT will
aggravate privacy issues and introduce unforeseen threats
that pose challenging technical problems. These privacy
threats, whether known or new, need to be considered  in
Privacy in the Internet of Things
 a reference model of the IoT accounting that accounts for
its speciﬁc entities and data ﬂows,  from the perspective
of existing privacy legislation, and  with regard to the
unique and evolving features in the IoT. For without a clear
understanding of the arising issues and the appropriate
counter-measures, the success of new pioneering services
and their users’ privacy will be at peril.
We contribute to this discussion in three steps: First,
Section  frames the notion of privacy in the IoT by
discussing its deﬁnition, a privacy-aware reference model
for the IoT, as well as existing privacy legislation. Second,
we contribute a detailed analysis of the IoT evolution from
the point of view of the involved technologies and features
in Section . 
. PRIVACY DEFINITION AND
REFERENCE MODEL FOR THE IOT
This section provides a framework to our analysis of
privacy threats and challenges. Section . deﬁnes privacy
in the speciﬁc context of the IoT. We observe that most
reference models are inadequate for privacy discussions
and present our own IoT reference model in Section ..
Finally, Section . discusses the scope of current privacy
legislation and its limitations in the IoT context.
.. Privacy Deﬁnition
Privacy is a very broad and diverse notion for which
literature offers many deﬁnitions and perspectives .
From a historic view, the notion of privacy shifted between
media, territorial, communication, and bodily privacy.
With the increasing use and efﬁciency of electronic
data processing information privacy has become the
predominant issue today. Information privacy was deﬁned
by Westin in  as ”the right to select what personal
information about me is known to what people” .
While Westin’s deﬁnition, although it referred to nonelectronic environments, is still valid, it is also too general
to enable focussed discussion about privacy in the IoT. We
thus adapt and concretize deﬁnition:
Privacy in the Internet of Things is the threefold
guarantee to the subject for
 awareness of privacy risks imposed by smart things
and services surrounding the data subject
 individual control over the collection and processing of personal information by the surrounding
smart things
 awareness and control of subsequent use and
dissemination of personal information by those
entities to any entity outside the subject’s personal
control sphere
Figure . IoT reference model with relevant entities and data
ﬂows in a typical IoT application.
Our deﬁnition of privacy captures in essence the idea of
informational self-determination by enabling the subject
 to assess his personal privacy risks,  to take
appropriate action to protect his privacy, and  to be
assured that it is enforced beyond his immediate control
sphere.
The
operating
systems
analogy
described
by
 in  is a similar concept to characterize
what we refer to as the personal sphere of the data subject.
In smart home scenarios it can be pictured as that person’s
household or immediate vicinity, as  ﬁttingly
observes. However, the exact scope of the subject’s
personal sphere can differ from situation to situation and
it is still unclear what constitutes the individual’s personal
sphere, or operating system boundaries in the analogous
terms, in e.g. a workplace environment or public space.
Similarly,
the
notion
of
personal
information
is
necessarily fuzzy, since privacy is a deeply social concept
and subject to greatly varying individual perception and
requirements . Hence, care must be taken when
designing new systems and services to carefully assess
the sensitivity of the involved information and relating
user requirements, e.g. as businesses are starting to
implement in privacy impact analysis’s . Ultimately,
our deﬁnition must be understood such that the user may
deﬁne what he considers personal information.
.. Reference model
The IoT reference model we propose is based on the
ITU  and IERC  visions of the IoT and can be
summarized as: Anyone and anything is interconnected
anywhere at any time via any network participating in
any service. Our reference model describes the entities and
information ﬂows of IoT applications.
In the model we consider four main types of entities
as depicted in Figure . Smart things are everyday
things augmented with information and communication
technology . They are able to collect, process and
communicate data about themselves and their environment
as well as to interact with other things and humans.

 Privacy in the Internet of Things
Backends host services that gather, combine and analyze
data from many smart things to offer a value-added
service to the end-user. Humans have two different
roles in our reference model. They can be subject to
data collection by the smart things surrounding them or
recipients of data or services. Note, that a person can
be both subject and recipient at the same time, e.g. in a
personal healthcare application. Finally, smart things are
connected to services via an infrastructure with different
characteristics ranging from low-power lossy networks to
powerful Internet backbones possibly traversing different
intermediate gateways and servers, e.g. ﬁrewalls and
protocol bridges.
Furthermore, we consider ﬁve different types of information ﬂows, also depicted in Figure , corresponding
to the phases in which the subject engages in a typical
IoT application. In the Interaction phase, the data subject
actively or passively interacts with the smart things in his
environment, thereby triggering a service. Smart things
then engage in the Collection of information and relay it
to the corresponding back-end via the available interconnection networks possibly with the help of intermediate
gateways. In the Processing phase, backends analyze the
information in order to provide the triggered service.
Dissemination of information towards the data subject
and potentially towards third parties constitutes the fourth
phase. Finally, in the Presentation phase, the service is
provided to the data subject by the surrounding smart
things according to the instructions by the backend. Note
that depending on the location and implementation of the
backend services, the ﬂow of information is thus either
 vertical, in the case of a central distant backend, 
horizontal, given a service that runs locally distributed
across the smart things, or  hybrid, when one or more
local things provide the service.
Our model abstracts from speciﬁc device classes,
technologies, interconnection methods and services in
order to provide a high-level model that ﬁts a wide
range of IoT systems and applications. Its assumptions
for ubiquitous interconnection of smart things and their
capabilities are general and powerful enough to account
for the ongoing evolution of the IoT. These assumptions
might not yet hold today, but represent the expected
developments of the IoT, as shows our analysis  and are also shared by others, e.g. in ’s
dense Internet of Things model . We thus believe that
the presented reference model adequately addresses our
considerations and requirements.
Note that different reference models have been proposed
to account for new technologies and applications as they
are added to the wide umbrella that is the IoT today.
Among others, the IoT-i consortium  and Atzori et. al
 survey existing reference models and IoT architectures.
Considerable progress towards an explicit reference model
has been made e.g. projects IoT-A  and
CASAGRAS . However, the proposed models often
seem too complex for our purpose or do not fully address
the following requirements. Privacy is an exclusively
human concern and we need to explicitly consider the
roles and involvement of users in the reference model.
Furthermore, the model should allow to reason about
privacy at a high level based on generic capabilities of
things and services. Finally, the IoT is an evolutionary
process and the reference model must thus abstract from
the underlying things and technologies. Especially, it
should not be limited to single technology spaces as e.g.
RFID technology.
.. Privacy legislation
Privacy legislation tries to draw boundaries to the evermore
data-hungry business models of many Internet enterprises
 and to deﬁne mandatory practices and processes
for privacy protection. We shortly review the development
and practical impact of privacy legislation then identify
relevant points and problems in the context of the Internet
of Things.
Privacy is recognized as a fundamental human right
in the  Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
is anchored in the constitutional law of most countries
today. The ﬁrst major piece of legislation on information
privacy was passed with the  US Privacy Act, which
established the fair information practices . The
FIPs comprise the principles of notice, consent, individual
access and control, data minimization, purposeful use,
adequate security and accountability. They have been taken
up in  by the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development , which anticipated tradebarriers from the increasingly diverse national privacy
legislation. While US privacy legislation continued with a
miscellany of speciﬁc sectorial laws, the European Union’s
aim for comprehensive legislation resulted in the 
Directive //EC on the protection of individuals with
regard to processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data . The directive embeds the
FIPs and adds the principle of explicit consent, which
basically forbids any kind of data collection without
explicit permission from the subject.
The practical impact has been different: While the
Privacy Act of  was unsuccessful in the US , the EU data directive has
not only effectively increased data protection standards
in Europe, but also evoked international self-regulatory
efforts, e.g. the Safe Harbor agreement . Today,
primarily the principles of notice, consent, access and
security are enforced e.g. in e-commerce and online
advertising. Privacy legislation also touches some mature
technologies which are part of the IoT evolution: RFID and
camera networks have received much attention in the past.
Recent legislation efforts have focussed on data protection
in cloud computing and adequate protection of web users
against tracking.
However, already today the level of privacy protection
offered by legislation is insufﬁcient, as day-to-day data

Privacy in the Internet of Things
 spills and unpunished privacy breaches  clearly
indicate. The Internet of Things will undoubtedly create
new grey areas with ample space to circumvent legislative
boundaries.
First, most pieces of legislation center around the
fuzzy notion of Personally Identiﬁable Information .
However, efforts towards a concise deﬁnition of what
constitutes PII  are quickly deprecated as new IoT
technologies unlock and combine new sets of data that can
enable identiﬁcation and make it increasingly difﬁcult to
distinguish PII from non-PII. Our deﬁnition of IoT privacy
 acknowledges this problem and demands for
involvement of the data subject.
Second, timeliness of legislation is a constant issue:
E.g. tracking of web-users has been used for many years,
before the European Commission passed a law against it in
early . With the IoT evolving fast, legislation is bound
to fall even farther behind. An example are Smart Meter
readings, which already allow to infer comprehensive
information about people’s lifestyle.
Third, already today, many privacy breaches go
unnoticed. In the IoT, awareness of privacy breaches
among users will be even lower, as data collection moves
into everyday things and happens more passively . Legislation, however, is often only a response to public
protests and outcries that require awareness of incidents in
the ﬁrst place.
Finally, the economics of privacy are still in favor of
those in disregard of privacy legislation. On the one side,
development of PETs, enforcement and audits of privacyprotection policies is expensive and can limit business
models. On the other side, violations of privacy legislations
either go unpunished or result only in comparably
small ﬁnes, while public awareness is still too low to
induce intolerable damage of public reputation. Thus,
disregard of privacy legislation, as e.g. Google deliberately
circumventing Safari’s user tracking protection , seems
proﬁtable. Over this incident, Google paid a record ﬁne
of $. Million in a settlement with the Federal Trade
Commission , but it is conceivable that the earnings
more than compensated.
It will be a major challenge to design a uniﬁed
enduring legislative framework for privacy protection in
the Internet of Things, instead of passing quickly outdated
pieces of legislation on singular technologies. Success will
undoubtedly require a comprehensive knowledge of the
technologic basis of the IoT and its ongoing evolution. The
key, however, will be a deep understanding of existing and
lingering new threats to privacy in the IoT – these threats
are what legislation needs to protect against, ultimately.
. EVOLUTION OF THE IOT
Starting with the vision of ubiquitous computing ,
the Internet of Things depends on technologic progress
to bring increasing miniaturization and availability of
information and communication technology at decreasing
cost and energy-consumption. The IoT is thus not a
disruptive new technology, but a novel paradigm whose
full realization will be a gradual process. This section
reviews key technologies in the past evolution of the
IoT and related work in privacy  and then
analyzes the current features of the IoT and how they
evolve . This discussion of evolving technologies and
features allows us to recognize and analyze privacy threats
and challenges early-on.
.. Evolving Technologies
RFID technology stands at the beginning of the IoT vision:
it enables passive automatic identiﬁcation of things at
the price of a couple of cents. Indeed, the realization
of the IoT vision is still often seen in the pervasive
deployment of RFID tags. RFID privacy issues have been
thoroughly researched . The dominant threats
are automatic identiﬁcation and tracking of people through
hidden tags, e.g. in clothes. Different countermeasures
have been proposed, such as reader authentication, tag
encryption, randomizing tag identiﬁers, and blocking or
killing of tags. Managing the lifecycle of an RFID tag is
a challenge that will also be interesting for smart things in
the IoT context.
Wireless sensor network  technology forms the
next evolutionary step of the IoT: Things become active,
as they are augmented with sensing, processing and
communication capabilities to build ﬁrst interconnected
networks of things. Today, sensor nodes range from
tiny millimeter-sized sensor nodes 
to meter-scale GSM-equipped weather stations. Sensor
networks include both small-scale home deployments and
also large-scale industrial monitoring systems enabled by
standards such as ZigBEE , Z-Wave , ANT 
or Bluetooth . Privacy research in WSNs has focussed
on privacy threats with regard to the collected sensor
data , queries to the network  and the
location of data sources and base stations .
Particular challenges that have been commonly identiﬁed
are uncontrollable environments and resource constraints,
which also characteristics of the IoT.
The advent of smart phones has further progressed the
realization of the IoT vision, being the ﬁrst mobile mass
devices with ubiquitous Internet connection. Smart phones
gather critical amounts of private data about their owner,
e.g. identiﬁers, physical location, and activity that bear
considerable privacy risks . Extensive privacy research
has been conducted focussing mostly on location-based
services , detection of privacy breaches 
and privacy aware architectures for participatory sensing
.
The cloud computing paradigm has thrived over the
last decade and offers means to handle the expected
information explosion in the IoT. Privacy research in cloud
computing has focussed on adequate data protection and

 Privacy in the Internet of Things
. Evolving features of the IoT today, in the past and future. Predictions are based on extensive literature research and analysis
of past and current developments in the IoT and in related areas. Error margins of predictions are indicated qualitatively.
Technology
Size
Interconnection
Data collection
Thing
Interaction

Interaction
Lifecycle



prevention of information leaks , auditing and
provenance , and private information processing . Cloud platforms are increasingly used to implement
backends for storing, processing and accessing information
of IoT applications, as e.g. platforms by COSM  and
Arrayent .
.. Evolving Features
Table I provides a summary of selected features that we
consider are most important in the context of privacy.
Further and more general discussions of developments in
the IoT can be found in . We form qualitative
predictions for the future evolution of the selected features
based on three pillars:  extrapolation from their past and
current development,  comparison to trends observed in
related areas, and  survey of opinions and predictions
from related literature . Since it is very hard to back such predictions
with hard data, errors are necessarily involved. Table I thus
also indicates qualitatively the estimated error margin of
the predictions.
Technology: As described in Section ., the Internet
of Things started with the Auto-ID Labs  envisioning
automatic identiﬁcation of things through RFID technology. Today, we see that more and more technologies are
integrated under the IoT umbrella term, e.g. sensor networks, smart phones, and cloud services. Predictions for
the future primarily foresee that information and communication technology increasingly moves into things thereby
making them smarter and self-aware . At the same
time, new technologies will be invented and made suitable
for the masses. Against this background, it is however
unclear if, when, and to which extent the envisioned state
of ubiquity and invisibility will be reached .
Size: Estimates from academia and major industry
players, among them IBM, HP, and Cisco, predict
staggering numbers of  billion  to trillions
of connected things by  . Although
predicted numbers and time horizons vary considerably,
even defensive scenarios indicate that the IoT will increase
the size of networks by orders of magnitude. Such massive
amounts of devices will seriously challenge the scalability
of existing and forthcoming privacy technology.
Interconnection: With the technologic advances and
decreasing costs of wireless communications, the IoT is
predicted to evolve towards a state where smart things
are ubiquitously interconnected . All-IP end-to-end
connectivity is the prevalent vision for realization of such
pervasive interconnectedness  and is heavily
pushed by the IETF 6LoWPAN and ETSI M2M working
groups. As smart things become query-able from any
distance in this process, this will not only bring forth great
opportunities for new services but also challenging privacy
issues.
Data collection: With people carrying smart phones
everywhere and sharing their lives on social networks, we
are already today witnessing an increasing penetration of
people’s private and public lives by technology that enables
data collection and with it identiﬁcation, tracking and
proﬁling . With the predicted advent and increasing
density of smart things, data collection will penetrate
people’s lives even more deeply and introduce whole
new sets of linkable and identiﬁable private data. During
this explosion of data collection technology, human
involvement also changes qualitatively: where smart
phones and social networks require a signiﬁcant amount of
active participation and awareness, humans will be mostly
passive and unaware of data collection by the foreseen
ﬂood of smart things. However, it is difﬁcult to give
reliable estimates of the extent of data collection and the
degree of penetration into the everyday of people’s lives as
forecasts greatly differ .
Thing interaction: With increasing numbers of smart
connected things, it will become important what interfaces
they provide to humans for conﬁguration, debugging
and interaction. We have witnessed a development from
RFID tags with little interaction capabilities to sensors
and devices featuring limited interfaces, such as LEDs
and small displays responding to buttons and touches.
Predictions that foresee mainly more haptic interfaces 
and the smart phone as central mediator between humans
and things based on web interfaces  seem very certain,

Privacy in the Internet of Things
 as we are already starting to see these developments
today. It is an interesting open question, whether webbased interfaces will prevail as primary interfaces to things.
Other prediction such as Intel’s for thought-driven control
 by  remain very dubious. The lack of interfaces
and interaction mechanisms can pose privacy threats as
observed in RFID . On the other hand, too complex
interfaces  do not seem
to help either, while increasingly personalized interaction
such as speech or, at the extreme, thoughts will even arise
new privacy issues.
System interaction: Apart from the interaction with
things, it is interesting how higher level interaction
of humans with the IoT, i.e. with groups of things,
systems and services, will develop. Similar arguments
and predictions as for thing interaction apply also to
system interaction. The main difference is that the whole
environment is envisioned to serve for interaction with
humans based on elaborate interfaces realized through
the collaboration and coordination of many smart things
and their speciﬁc capabilities. Less coherent predictions
foresee thought-driven interaction and mechanisms that
appeal to all human senses. An environment where humans
are pervasively and passively exposed to interaction and
feedback from IoT systems must be carefully designed not
to violate their privacy.
Lifecycle: Usually, a very simple lifecycle of a thing
is assumed. It is sold, used by its owner and ﬁnally
disposed of and no information is stored by the thing
in this process. The protest against the privacy-violating
Benetton campaign  in  have proven that this model
is oversimplying: Benetton planned to equip its entire
product line with RFID tags, that would remain active
after garments had been sold. This change of ownership
in the lifecycle of the RFID tag was not considered.
In the IoT, smart things are predicted to store extensive
information about their own history throughout their entire
lifecylcle . Furthermore, many everyday things, such
as light bulbs, are designed to be easily exchangeable
as should be their smart equivalents. It remains to be
seen, if lifecycles become even more dynamic, e.g. with
business models evolving around borrowing instead of
owning smart things such as medical equipment or tools.
With increasing storage of data and transitions during the
lifecycle of a thing, managing security and privacy aspects
will become more difﬁcult.
From vertical to horizontal: Today’s IoT-like systems
are mostly separate vertically-integrated solutions, often
based on custom technology, protocols and architectures.
Direct collaboration between two such systems is the
exception. With increasing standardization of protocols
and platforms, horizontal integration of systems, i.e.
increasingly local and distributed collaboration, is predicted. E.g. smart meters could cooperate with other meters
in the neighborhood and directly switch on and off the
Figure . Threats in the Reference Model.
household’s appliances instead of only pushing consumption data to the central utility provider. Despite the promising advantages of horizontal integration performance- and
functionality-wise, central solutions still seem to prevail
and it remains unclear if and when the potential of horizontal integration can be realized. The envisioned collaboration of systems with different purposes and manufacturers
can, however, induce privacy threats and security breaches.
While, on the other hand, the locality of information
ﬂows in horizontally integrated systems is inherently more
privacy-preserving than in their vertically-integrated, centralized counterparts.
. PRIVACY THREATS AND
CHALLENGES IN THE IOT
The evolving nature of the IoT regarding technologies and
features as well as the emerging new ways of interaction
with the IoT lead to speciﬁc privacy threats and challenges.
This section presents our classiﬁcation of those threats.
Figure  arranges them into the ﬁve different phases from
our reference model  according to where they
are most prone to appear.
Each of the seven threat categories is analyzed in foursteps: First, a deﬁnition and characterization of the threat
category with concrete instances of privacy violations is
given. Second, we analyze how the IoT evolution impacts,
changes and aggravates the particular threat. Here, Table
II serves as a summary of two or three selected features
with most impact on a particular threat category. Third,
we identify approaches and counter-measures from related
work and ask whether they be applied also in the IoT
or are insufﬁcient. Fourth, we present the main technical
challenges and potential approaches to overcome those
threats in the IoT. Of course, the threat categories are
not totally disjunct and we make sure to point out
dependencies and overlaps between different threats. Note
that our perspective and classiﬁcation thereby focusses
on privacy threatening functionality in the IoT to allow

 Privacy in the Internet of Things
better reasoning over the technical roots of threats and
possible counter-measures than a user- or incident-centric
perspective, as e.g. taken by .
.. Identiﬁcation
Identiﬁcation denotes the threat of associating a  identiﬁer, e.g. a name and address or a pseudonym
of any kind, with an individual and data about him. The
threat thus lies in associating an identity to a speciﬁc
privacy violating context and it also enables and aggravates
other threats, e.g. proﬁling and tracking of individuals or
combination of different data sources.
The threat of identiﬁcation is currently most dominant
in the information processing phase at the backend
services of our reference model, where huge amounts of
information is concentrated in a central place outside of
the subject’s control. In the IoT also the interaction and
collection phase will become relevant, as the impact of the
evolving technologies and interconnection and interaction
features aggravates the threat of identiﬁcation, as identiﬁed
in Table II: First, surveillance camera technology is
increasingly integrated and used in non-security contexts,
e.g. for analytics and marketing . As facial
databases  become available also to
non-governmental parties like marketing platforms ,
automatic identiﬁcation of individuals from camera images
is already a reality. Second, the increasing 
interconnection and vertical communication of everyday
things, opens up possibilities for identiﬁcation of devices
through ﬁngerprinting. It was recognized already for
RFID technology that individuals can be identiﬁed by
the aura of their things . Third, speech recognition is
widely used in mobile applications and huge data-bases
of speech samples are already being built. Those could
potentially be used to recognize and identify individuals,
e.g. by governments requesting access to that data .
With speech recognition evolving as a powerful way of
interaction with IoT systems  and the proliferation
of cloud computing for processing tasks, this will further
amplify the attack vector and privacy risks.
Identity protection and, complementary, protection
against identiﬁcation is a predominant topic in RFID
privacy , but has also gained much attention
in the areas of data anonymization , and
privacy-enhancing identity management . Those
approaches are difﬁcult to ﬁt to the IoT: Most data
anonymization techniques can be broken using auxiliary
data , that is likely to become available at
some point during the IoT evolution. Identity management
solutions, besides relying heavily on expensive cryptooperations,
are
mostly
designed
for
very
conﬁned
environments, like enterprise or home networks and thus
difﬁcult to ﬁt to the distributed, diverse and heterogeneous
environment of the IoT. Approaches from RFID privacy
due to similarities in resource constraints and numbers of
things are the most promising. However, those approaches
do not account for the diverse data sources available in the
IoT as e.g. camera images and speech samples.
We see as a main challenge the design of IoT systems
that favor local over centralized processing, horizontal over
vertical communications, such that less identifying data is
available outside the personal sphere of a user and attack
vectors for identiﬁcation are reduced. Since identiﬁcation
is not always possible or even desired to prevent, it is
important that users are made aware according to our
privacy deﬁnition , which in itself is a major
challenge.
.. Localization and Tracking
Localization and tracking is the threat of determining and
recording a person’s location through time and space.
Tracking requires identiﬁcation of some kind to bind
continuos localizations to one individual. Already today,
tracking is possible through different means, e.g. GPS,
internet trafﬁc, or cell phone location. Many concrete
privacy violations have been identiﬁed related to this
threat, e.g. GPS stalking , disclosure of private
information such as an illness , or generally the uneasy
feeling of being watched . However, localization and
tracking of individuals is also an important functionality
in many IoT systems. These examples show that users
perceive it as a violation when they don’t have control over
their location information, are unaware of its disclosure, or
if information is used and combined in an inappropriate
context. This coincides with our deﬁnition of privacy
.
In the immediate physical proximity, localization and
tracking usually do not lead to privacy violations, as
e.g. anyone in the immediate surrounding can directly
observe the subject’s location. Traditionally, localization
and tracking thus appears as a threat mainly in the phase
of information processing, when locations traces are built
at backends outside the subject’s control. However, the IoT
evolution will change and aggravate this threat in three
ways: First, we observe an increasing use of location-based
services . IoT technologies will not only support the
development of such LBS and improve their accuracy but
also expand those services to indoor environments e.g. for
smart retail . Second, as data collection becomes
more passive, more pervasive and less intrusive, users
become less aware of when they are being tracked and
the involved risks. Third, the increasing interaction with
smart things and systems leaves data trails that not only
put the user at risk of identiﬁcation but also allow to track
his location and activity, e.g. swiping an NFC-enabled
smart phone to get a bus ticket or using the cities’ smart
parking system. With these developments, the threat of
localization and tracking will appear also in the interaction
phase, making the subject trackable in situations where he
might falsely perceive physical separation from others, e.g.
by walls or shelves, as privacy.
Research on location privacy has proposed many
approaches that can be categorized by their architectural
perspective  into
 client-server,  trusted
third party, and  distributed/peer-to-peer. However,

Privacy in the Internet of Things
 Table II. Summary of the impact of the evolving features on the seven categories of privacy threats. Statements in italics indicate that
impact is possibly ambiguous.
Technology
Size
Interconnection
Data collection
Thing
Interaction
System
Interaction
Lifecycle
Vertical vs.
horizontal
Identiﬁcation
Cameras, face
recognition
Fingerprinting
Speech, cloud
interfaces
Tracking
Indoor LBS
Decreasing
awareness
Data trails
Proﬁling
Explosion of
data sources
Qualitatively
new sets of data
Interaction &
Presentation
Presentation
media
Pervasive
interaction with
users
Lifecycle
transitions
Product history
log
Exchangeability
Sensitive data
on devices
Inventory
attacks
Diversiﬁcation
Wireless
communication
Linkage
Decreasing
transparency
Drives
linkage
locally
those approaches have been mostly tailored to outdoor
scenarios where the user actively uses a LBS through his
smart phone. Thus, these approaches do not ﬁt without
signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to the changes brought by IoT.
The main challenges we identify are  awareness of
tracking in the face of passive data collection,  control
of shared location data in indoor environments, and
 privacy-preserving protocols for interaction with IoT
systems.
.. Proﬁling
Proﬁling denotes the threat of compiling information
dossiers about individuals in order to infer interests by
correlation with other proﬁles and data. Proﬁling methods
are mostly used for personalization in e-commerce 
but also for internal optimization based on customer
demographics and interests. Examples where proﬁling
is leads to a violation of privacy violation are price
discrimination , unsolicited advertisements ,
social engineering , or erroneous automatic decisions
, e.g. by facebooks automatic detection of sexual
offenders . Also, collecting and selling proﬁles about
people as practiced by several data market places today
is commonly perceived as a privacy violation. The
examples show that the proﬁling threat appears mainly
in the dissemination phase, towards third parties, but
also towards the subject itself in form of erroneous or
discriminating decisions.
The impact of the evolving features in the IoT is
mainly twofold, as shown in Table II: First, the IoT
evolution leads to an explosion of data sources as more
and more everyday things get connected. Second, while
data collection thus increases quantitatively by orders of
magnitude, it also changes qualitatively as data is collected
from previously inaccessible parts of people’s private lives.
Additionally, the aggravation of identiﬁcation and tracking
threats further fuels the possibilities for proﬁling and
danger from dubious data-selling businesses.
Existing approaches to preserve privacy include clientside personalization, data perturbation, obfuscation and
anonymization, distribution and working on encrypted data
. These approaches can possibly be applied to
IoT scenarios but must be adapted from the usual model
that assumes a central database and account for the many
distributed data sources which are expected in the IoT.
This will require considerable efforts for recalibration of
metrics and redesign of algorithms, as e.g. recent work in
differential privacy for distributed data sources shows .
After all, data collection is one of the central promises
of the IoT and a main driver for its realization. We
thus see the biggest challenge in balancing the interests
of businesses for proﬁling and data analysis with users’
privacy requirements.
.. Privacy-violating interaction and
presentation
This threat refers to conveying private information through
a public medium and in the process disclosing it to an
unwanted audience. It can be loosely sketched as shouldersurﬁng but in real-world environments.
Many IoT applications, e.g. smart retail, transportation,
and healthcare, envision and require heavy interaction
with the user. In such systems, it is imaginable that
information will be provided to users using smart things in
their environment , e.g. through advanced lighting
installations, speakers or video screens. Vice versa, users
will control systems in new intuitive ways using the things
surrounding them, e.g. moving, touching and speaking
to smart things. However, many of those interaction and
presentation mechanisms are inherently public, i.e. people
in the vicinity can observe them. This becomes a threat
to privacy when private information is exchanged between
the system and its user. In smart cities e.g. a person might

 Privacy in the Internet of Things
ask for the way to a speciﬁc health clinic. Such a query
should not be answered e.g. by displaying the way on a
public display nearby, visible to any passers-by. Another
example are recommendations in stores that reﬂect private
interests, such as speciﬁc diet food and medicine, movies
or books on precarious topics. Due to its close connection
to interaction and presentation mechanisms, the threat
of privacy-violating interactions and presentation appears
primarily in the homonymous phases of our reference
model.
Since such advanced IoT services are still in the
future, privacy violating interactions have not received
much attention from research. Interaction mechanisms
are however crucial to usable IoT systems and privacy
threats must consequently be addressed. We identify two
speciﬁc challenges that will have to be solved: First, we
need means for automatic detection of privacy-sensitive
content. It is easily imaginable that the provisioning of
content and rendering it for the user are handled in two
steps by two different systems: E.g. company A generates
recommendations for customers of a store, which are then
delivered to the customer by company B’s system: either
by special lighting and the use of speakers or through a
push to his smart phone. How to choose between those two
interaction mechanisms, one public one private? Should
company A mark privacy sensitive content or should
company B detect it? How can company B  protect itself from A’s lax privacy attitude?
Automatic detection of privacy-sensitive content can help
to decide these questions. Second, with the previous point
in mind, scoping will be necessary, i.e. how can we
scope public presentation medium to a speciﬁc subgroup
of recipients or a speciﬁc physical area? This approach
would proof useful to support users, which have no smart
phone . However, it will be difﬁcult
to accurately determine the captive audience of a particular
presentation medium, separate the intended target group
and adjust the scope accordingly. E.g. what if the target
user is in the midst of a group of people?
Applications for privacy-preserving pervasive interaction mechanisms are, e.g. smart stores and malls, smart
cities and healthcare applications. Here, it would certainly
be an achievement to provide similar levels of privacy
as people would expect in the contexts of their everyday
conversations, i.e. interactions with their peers.
.. Lifecycle transitions
Privacy is threatened when smart things disclose private
information during changes of control spheres in their
lifecycle. The problem has been observed directly with
regard to compromising photos and videos that are often
found on used cameras or smart phones – in some cases,
disturbing data has even been found on ’new’ devices
. Since privacy violations from lifecycle transitions are
mainly due to the collected and stored information, this
threat relates to the information collection phase of our
reference model.
Two developments in the IoT will likely aggravate
issues due to the lifecycle of things . First, smart
things will interact with a number of persons, other things,
systems, or services and amass this information in product
history logs. In some applications, such data is highly
sensitive, e.g. health-data collected by medical devices
for home-care. But also the collection of simple usagedata  could disclose
much about the lifestyle of people. Already today, detailed
usage logs are maintained for warranty cases in TV sets,
notebooks or cars. Second, as exchangeable everyday
things such as lightbulbs become smart, the sheer numbers
of such things entering and leaving the personal sphere will
make it increasingly difﬁcult to prevent disclosure of such
information.
Despite obvious problems with the lifecycle of todays
smart phones, cameras, and other storage devices this
threat has not been properly addressed. The lifecycle of
most consumer products is still modeled as buy-once-ownforever and solutions have not evolved beyond a total
memory wipe  or physical
destruction . Smart
things could, however, feature a much more dynamic
lifecycle, with things being borrowed, exchanged, added
and disposed freely. We thus identify the requirement
for ﬂexible solutions that will undoubtedly pose some
challenges: Automatic detection of lifecycle transitions of
a smart thing will be required to implement convenient
privacy lifecycle management mechanisms. E.g. a smart
rubbish bin could automatically cleanse all items in it from
private information, such as medicine prescriptions on a
smart pill box. It will be difﬁcult, though, to automatically
distinguish between different lifecycle transitions as e.g.
lending, selling or disposing of an item and taking
the appropriate action. Certain lifecycle transitions, e.g.
borrowing a smart thing, will require locking private
information temporarily, e.g. the readings of a vital signs
monitor. Once the device has returned to its original owner,
the private data can be unlocked and the original owner can
continue to use it seamlessly.
.. Inventory attack
Inventory attacks refer to the unauthorized collection of
information about the existence and characteristics of
personal things.
One evolving feature of the IoT is interconnection
. With the realization of the All-IP and
end-to-end vision, smart things become query-able over
the Internet. While things can then be queried from
anywhere by legitimate entities , non-legitimate parties
can query and exploit this to compile an inventory list
of things at a speciﬁc place, e.g. of a household, ofﬁce
building, or factory. Even if smart things could distinguish
legitimate from illegitimate queries, a ﬁngerprint of their

Privacy in the Internet of Things
 communication speeds, reaction times and other unique
characteristics could potentially be used to determine
their type and model. With the predicted proliferation of
wireless communication technology, ﬁngerprinting attacks
could also be mounted passively, e.g. by an eavesdropper in
the vicinity of the victim’s house. Since inventory attacks
are mainly enabled by the increasing communication
capabilities of things, the threat arises in the information
collection phase of our reference model.
The impact of new technologies on this threat is not yet
clear. On the one hand, we expect the diversiﬁcation of
technologies in the IoT as more and more different things
become smart. Diversiﬁcation increases the attack vector
for ﬁngerprinting, as e.g. observed with the many diverse
conﬁgurations of web browsers . On the other hand, at
some point in time we expect the establishment of certain
standards for communication and interaction that could
reduce such differences.
Manifold concrete privacy violations based on inventory
attacks are imaginable or have actually happened. First,
burglars can use inventory information for targeted
break-ins at private homes, ofﬁces and factories, similar
to how they already use social media today to stake
out potential victims . Note that a comprehensive
inventory attack could then also be used to proﬁle the antiburglar system down to every last presence sensor. Second,
law enforcement and other authorities could use the
attack to conduct  searches. Third, private
information is disclosed by the possession of speciﬁc
things, such as personal interests  or health . Fourth,
efforts for industrial espionage can be complemented
through an inventory attack, as noted by Mattern .
  and Van Deursen  have recognized the danger of proﬁling through ﬁngerprinting in
the context of RFID. However, with RFID the problem
is at a much more local scope as RFID tags can be
read only from a close distance and queries are mostly
restricted to reading the tag’s identiﬁer. As analyzed above,
the problem will aggravate in the IoT evolution as the
attack vector is greatly increased by increasing proliferation of wireless communications, end-to-end connectivity,
and more sophisticated queries. In order to thwart inventory attacks in the IoT, we identify the following two
technical challenges: First, smart things must be able to
authenticate queries and only answer to those by legitimate parties to thwart active inventory attacks through
querying. Research in lightweight security provides useful approaches for authentication in resource-constrained
environments. Second, mechanisms that ensure robustness
against ﬁngerprinting will be required to prevent passive
inventory attacks based on the communication ﬁngerprint
of a smart thing. Inventory attacks will undoubtedly be
difﬁcult to counter. The fact that the use of PETs, though
meant to protect privacy, can actually make ﬁngerprinting
even easier, leaves hiding in the  masses
currently as the most viable but clearly suboptimal solution
. However, an IoT system that discloses comprehensive information about its owner’s possessions is not likely
to gain acceptance.
.. Linkage
This
threat
consists
in
linking
different
previously
separated systems such that the combination of data
sources reveals  information that
the subject did not disclose to the previously isolated
sources and, most importantly, also did not want to reveal.
Users fear poor judgement and loss of context when data
that was gathered from different parties under different
contexts and permissions is combined . Privacy
violations can also arise from bypassing privacy protection
mechanisms, as the risks of unauthorized access and leaks
of private information increases when systems collaborate
to combine data sources. A third example of privacy
violations through linkage of data sources and systems
is the increased risk of re-identiﬁcation of anonymized
data. A common approach towards protecting privacy is
working on anonymized data only, but the act of combining
different sets of anonymous data can often enable reidentiﬁcation through unforeseen effects . The
examples show that the threat of linkage primarily appears
in the information dissemination phase .
The threat of linkage will aggravate in the IoT evolution
for two main reasons. First, horizontal integration will
eventually link systems from different companies and
manufacturers to form a heterogeneous distributed systemof-systems delivering new services that no single system
could provide on its own. Successful collaboration will
above all require an agile exchange of data and controls
between the different parties. However, as horizontal
integration features more local data ﬂows than vertical
integration it could provide a way to enhance privacy.
Second, the linkage of systems will render data collection
in the IoT even less transparent than what already is
expected from the predicted passive and unintrusive data
collection by smart things.
Threats from linking different systems and information
sources are not entirely new. They can already be observed
in the domain of online social networks  and
their applications. However, this involves only two parties
, while the
IoT is expected to feature services that depend on the
interaction and collaboration of many coequal systems.
Here, we identify three technical challenges for privacyenhanced systems-of-systems: First, transparency about
what information a system-of-systems shares with whom is
crucial to gain user acceptance. Second, permission models
and access control must be adapted to the plurality of
stakeholders collaborating in linked systems. Third, data
anonymization techniques must work on linked systems
and be robust against combination of many different sets
of data. E.g. it will be interesting how concepts like
differential privacy can be ﬁtted to such multi-stakeholder
multi-systems scenarios.

 Privacy in the Internet of Things
. CONCLUSION
This paper motivates the need for a detailed analysis of
privacy threats and challenges in the Internet of Things.
We dissect this complex topic into a four-step approach:
First, we provide a formal basis for discussing privacy
in the IoT by concisely framing our notion of privacy
and the applied reference model. A short review of
relevant privacy legislation identiﬁes clear insufﬁciencies
and further motivates the need for a detailed assessment
of privacy threats. In the second step, we acknowledge
that the Internet of Things is constantly evolving and
cannot be reduced to the sum of the technologies it builds
upon. Here, our discussions of evolving technologies and
features provide both a general and privacy-focused view
on the past, present and future evolution of the IoT.
Thirdly, we summarize existing privacy threats into seven
categories and review them in the light of the evolving
IoT. Identiﬁcation, tracking and proﬁling are long known
threats that, as we show, will be greatly aggravated in
the IoT. The four threats of privacy-violating interactions
and presentations, lifecycle transitions, inventory attacks
and information linkage arise later in the IoT evolution.
They represent partly new threats that have only been
scratched in the related work, but can become very
dangerous with regard to the predicted evolution of the
IoT. The arrangement of threats in our reference model
provides a clear idea of where threats appear and where to
approach them conceptually. Finally, technical challenges
are discussed in the context of each threat that provide clear
directions for future research.
We consider that proﬁling remains one of the most
severe threats: Our analysis shows that it is greatly
aggravated and that other threats like identiﬁcation or
tracking, though each provoking different very speciﬁc
privacy violations, add to its dangers by supplying even
more linkable data. At the same time, business models
that depend heavily on proﬁling have enjoyed tremendous
success and so the trend for big data continues, fueled by
the IoT’s central promise for ﬁne-grained and ubiquitous
data collection. Here, the challenge consists in designing
privacy-aware solutions for the IoT that allow to balance
business interests and customers’ privacy requirements.
We consider privacy-violations in the interaction and
presentation phase an important future threat, because
of the corresponding interaction mechanisms with smart
things and systems that are just evolving and are rather
unique to the IoT. The involved technical challenges have
hence received little attention in the related work so far
and require new ways of using technology as well as
a fair amount of foresight and sensitivity for privacy
implications. We aim to design technical solutions that
allow users to interact with IoT systems in manifold
ways, while affording privacy protection similar to the
intuitive understanding of privacy people apply in real
world situations.
Finally, we stress two core thoughts, that our work
suggests for a privacy-aware Internet of Things: First, the
IoT is evolving – privacy is a constant challenge and must
be faced with the necessary foresight. Second, a fruitful
outcome requires coordinated action to provide technical
solutions supported by the corresponding legal framework.


